The Golden Castaways
By Lloyd Osbourne
All I did was to pull him out by the seat of the trousers. The fat old thing
had gone out in the dark to the end of the yacht's boat- boom, and was
trying to worry in the dinghy with his toe, when plump he dropped into a
six-knot ebb tide. Of course, if I hadn't happened along in a launch, he
might have drowned, but, as for anything heroic on my part--why, the
very notion is preposterous. The whole affair only lasted half a minute,
and in five he was aboard his yacht and drinking hot Scotch in a plush
dressing-gown. It was natural that his wife and daughter should be
frightened, and natural, too, I suppose, that when they had finished
crying over him they should cry over me. He had taken a chance with the
East River, and it had been the turn of a hair whether he floated down the
current a dead grocer full of brine, or stood in that cabin, a live one full of
grog. Oh, no! I am not saying a word against THEM. But as for
Grossensteck himself, he ought really to have known better, and it makes
me flush even now to recall his monstrous perversion of the truth. He
called me a hero to my face. He invented details to which my dry clothes
gave the lie direct. He threw fits of gratitude. His family were theatrically
commanded to regard me well, so that my countenance might be forever
imprinted on their hearts; and they, poor devils, in a seventh heaven to
have him back safe and sound in their midst, regarded and regarded, and
imprinted and imprinted, till I felt like a perfect ass masquerading as a
Hobson.
It was all I could do to tear myself away. Grossensteck clung to me. Mrs.
Grossensteck clung to me. Teresa--that was the daughter-- Teresa, too,
clung to me. I had to give my address. I had to take theirs. Medals were
spoken of; gold watches with inscriptions; a common purse, on which I
was requested to confer the favour of drawing for the term of my natural
life. I departed in a blaze of glory, and though I could not but see the
ridiculous side of the affair (I mean as far as I was concerned), I was
moved by so affecting a family scene, and glad, indeed, to think that the
old fellow had been spared to his wife and daughter. I had even a pang of
envy, for I could not but contrast myself with Grossensteck, and
wondered if there were two human beings in the world who would have
cared a snap whether I lived or died. Of course, that was just a passing
mood, for, as a matter of fact, I am a man with many friends, and I knew

some would feel rather miserable were I to make a hole in saltwater. But,
you see, I had just had a story refused by Schoonmaker's Magazine, a
good story, too, and that always gives me a sinking feeling--to think that
after all these years I am still on the borderland of failure, and can never
be sure of acceptance, even by the second-class periodicals for which I
write. However, in a day or two, I managed to unload "The Case against
Phillpots" on somebody else, and off I started for the New Jersey coast
with a hundred and fifty dollars in my pocket, and no end of plans for a
long autumn holiday.
I never gave another thought to Grossensteck until one morning, as I was
sitting on the veranda of my boarding-house, the postman appeared and
requested me to sign for a registered package. I opened it with some
trepidation, for I had caught that fateful name written crosswise in the
corner and began at once to apprehend the worst. I think I have as much
assurance as any man, but it took all I had and more, too, when I
unwrapped a gold medal the thickness and shape of an enormous
checker, and deciphered the following inscription:
Presented to Hugo Dundonald Esquire for having
With signal heroism, gallantry and presence of mind
rescued On the night of June third, 1900
the life of Hermann Grossensteck from
The dark and treacherous waters of the East River.
The thing was as thick as two silver dollars, laid the one on the other, and
gold--solid, ringing, massy gold--all the way through; and it was
associated with a blue satin ribbon, besides, which was to serve for
sporting it on my manly bosom. I set it on the rail and laughed--laughed
till the tears ran down my cheeks--while the other boarders crowded
about me; handed it from hand to hand; grew excited to think that they
had a hero in their midst; and put down my explanation to the proverbial
modesty of the brave. Blended with my amusement were some qualms at
the intrinsic value of the medal, for it could scarcely have cost less than
three or four hundred dollars, and it worried me to think that
Grossensteck must have drawn so lavishly on his savings. It had not
occurred to me, either before or then, that he was rich; somehow, in the
bare cabin of the schooner, I had received no such impression of his
means. I had not even realised that the vessel was his own, taking it for

granted that it had been hired, all standing, for a week or two with the
put-by economies of a year. His home address ought to have set me
right, but I had not taken the trouble to read it, slipping it into my pocketbook more to oblige him than with any idea of following up the
acquaintance. It was one of the boarders that enlightened me.
"Grossensteck!" he exclaimed; "why, that's the great cheap grocer of New
York, the Park & Tilford of the lower orders! There are greenbacks in his
rotten tea, you know, and places to leave your baby while you buy his
sanded sugar, and if you save eighty tags of his syrup you get a silver
spoon you wouldn't be found dead with! Oh, everybody knows
Grossensteck!"
"Well, I pulled the great cheap grocer out of the East River," I said.
"There was certainly a greenback in that tea," and I took another look at
my medal, and began to laugh all over again.
"There's no reason why you should ever have another grocery bill," said
the boarder. "That is, if flavour cuts no figure with you, and you'd rather
eat condemned army stores than not!"
I sat down and wrote a letter of thanks. It was rather a nice letter, for I
could not but feel pleased at the old fellow's gratitude, even if it were a
trifle overdone, and, when all's said, it was undoubtedly a fault on the
right side. I disclaimed the heroism, and bantered him good-naturedly
about the medal, which, of course, I said I would value tremendously and
wear on appropriate occasions. I wondered at the time what occasion
could be appropriate to decorate one's self with a gold saucer covered
with lies--but, naturally, I didn't go into that to HIM. When you accept a
solid chunk of gold you might as well be handsome about it, and I piled it
on about his being long spared to his family and to a world that wouldn't
know how to get along without him. Yes, it was a stunning letter, and I've
often had the pleasure of reading it since in a splendid frame below my
photograph.
I had been a month or more in New York, and December was already well
advanced before I looked up my Grossenstecks, which I did one late
afternoon as I happened to be passing in their direction. It was a house of
forbidding splendour, on the Fifth Avenue side of Central Park, and, as I
trod its marble halls, I could not but repeat to myself: "Behold, the
grocer's dream!" But I could make no criticism of my reception by Mrs.

Grossensteck and Teresa, whom I found at home and delighted to see
me. Mrs. Grossensteck was a stout, jolly, motherly woman, common, of
course,--but, if you can understand what I mean,--common in a nice way,
and honest and unpretentious and likable. Teresa, whom I had scarcely
noticed on the night of the accident, was a charmingly pretty girl of
eighteen, very chic and gay, with pleasant manners and a contagious
laugh. She had arrived at obviously the turn of the Grossensteck fortunes,
and might, in refinement and everything else, have belonged to another
clay. How often one sees that in America, the land above others of social
contrast, where, in the same family, there are often three separate
degrees of caste.
Well, to get along with my visit. I liked them and they liked me, and I
returned later the same evening to dine and meet papa. I found him as
impassionedly grateful as before, and with a tale that trespassed even
further on the incredible, and after dinner we all sat around a log fire and
talked ourselves into a sort of intimacy. They were wonderfully good
people, and though we hadn't a word in common, nor an idea, we
somehow managed to hit it off, as one often can with those who are
unaffectedly frank and simple. I had to cry over the death of little
Hermann in the steerage (when they had first come to America twenty
years ago), and how Grossensteck had sneaked gingersnaps from the
slop-baskets of the saloon.
"The little teffil never knew where they come from," said Grossensteck,
"and so what matters it?"
"That's Papa's name in the slums," said Teresa. "Uncle Gingersnaps,
because at all his stores they give away so many for nothing."
"By Jove!" I said, "there are some nick-names that are patents of
nobility."
What impressed me as much as anything with these people was their
loneliness. Parvenus are not always pushing and self-seeking, nor do they
invariably throw down the ladder by which they have climbed. The
Grossenstecks would have been so well content to keep their old friends,
but poverty hides its head from the glare of wealth and takes fright at
altered conditions.

"They come--yes," said Mrs. Grossensteck, "but they are scared of the
fine house, of the high-toned help, of everything being gold, you know,
and fashionable. And when Papa sends their son to college, or gives the
girl a little stocking against her marriage day, they slink away ashamed.
Oh, Mr. Dundonald, but it's hard to thank and be thanked, especially
when the favours are all of one side!"
"The rich have efferyting," said Grossensteck, "but friends-- Nein!"
New ones had apparently never come to take the places of the old; and
the old had melted away. Theirs was a life of solitary grandeur, varied
with dinner parties to their managers and salesmen. Socially speaking,
their house was a desert island, and they themselves three castaways on
a golden rock, scanning the empty seas for a sail. To carry on a
metaphor, I might say I was the sail and welcomed accordingly. I was
everything that they were not; I was poor; I mixed with people whose
names filled them with awe; my own was often given at first nights and
things of that sort. In New York, the least snobbish of great cities, a man
need have but a dress suit and car-fare--if he be the right kind of a man,
of course--to go anywhere and hold up his head with the best. In a place
so universally rich, there is even a certain piquancy in being a pauper.
The Grossenstecks were overcome to think I shined my own shoes, and
had to calculate my shirts, and the fact that I was no longer young (that's
the modern formula for forty), and next-door to a failure in the art I had
followed for so many years, served to whet their pity and their regard. My
little trashy love-stories seemed to them the fruits of genius, and they
were convinced, the poor simpletons, that the big magazines were
banded in a conspiracy to block my way to fame.
"My dear poy," said Grossensteck, "you know as much of peeziness as a
child unporne, and I tell you it's the same efferywhere--in groceries, in
hardware, in the alkali trade, in effery branch of industry, the pig
operators stand shoulder to shoulder to spiflicate the little fellers like you.
You must combine with the other producers; you must line up and break
through the ring; you must scare them out of their poots, and, by Gott,
I'll help you do it!"
In their naive interest in my fortunes, the Grossenstecks rejoiced at an
acceptance, and were correspondingly depressed at my failures. A fifteendollar poem would make them happy for a week; and when some of my
editors were slow to pay-on the literary frontiers there is a great deal of

this sort of procrastination-- Uncle Gingersnaps was always hot to put the
matter into the hands of his collectors, and commence legal proceedings
in default.
Little by little I drifted into a curious intimacy with the Grossenstecks.
Their house by degrees became my refuge. I was given my own suite of
rooms, my own latch-key; I came and went unremarked; and what I
valued most of all was that my privacy was respected, and no one
thought to intrude upon me when I closed my door. In time I managed to
alter the whole house to my liking, and spent their money like water in
the process. Gorgeousness gave way to taste; I won't be so fatuous as to
say my taste; but mine was in conjunction with the best decorators in
New York. One was no longer blinded by magnificence, but found rest and
peace and beauty. Teresa and I bought the pictures. She was a
wonderfully clever girl, full of latent appreciation and understanding which
until then had lain dormant in her breast. I quickened those unsuspected
fires, and, though I do not vaunt my own judgment as anything
extraordinary, it represented at least the conventional standard and was
founded on years of observation and training. We let the old masters go
as something too smudgy and recondite for any but experts, learning our
lesson over one Correggio which nearly carried us into the courts, and
bought modern American instead, amongst them some fine examples of
our best men. We had a glorious time doing it, too, and showered the
studios with golden rain--in some where it was evidently enough needed.
There was something childlike in the Grossenstecks' confidence in me; I
mean the old people; for it was otherwise with Teresa, with whom I often
quarrelled over my artistic reforms, and who took any conflict in taste to
heart. There were whole days when she would not speak to me at all,
while I, on my side, was equally obstinate, and all this, if you please,
about some miserable tapestry or a Louise Seize chair or the right light
for a picture of Will Low's. But she was such a sweet girl and so pretty
that one could not be angry with her long, and what with our fights and
our makings up I dare say we made it more interesting to each other than
if we had always agreed. It was only once that our friendship was put in
real jeopardy, and that was when her parents decided they could not die
happy unless we made a match of it. This was embarrassing for both of
us, and for a while she treated me very coldly. But we had it out together
one evening in the library and decided to let the matter make no
difference to us, going on as before the best of friends. I was the last
person to expect a girl of eighteen to care for a man of forty, particularly

one like myself, ugly and grey-haired, who had long before outworn the
love of women. In fact I had to laugh, one of those sad laughs that come
to us with the years, at the thought of anything so absurd; and I soon got
her to give up her tragic pose and see the humour of it all as I did. So we
treated it as a joke, rallied the old folks on their sentimental folly, and let
it pass.
It set me thinking, however, a great deal about the girl and her future,
and I managed to make interest with several of my friends and get her
invited to some good houses. Of course it was impossible to carry the old
people into this galere. They were frankly impossible, but fortunately so
meek and humble that it never occurred to them to assert themselves or
resent their daughter going to places where they would have been
refused. Uncle Gingersnaps would have paid money to stay at home, and
Mrs. Grossensteck had too much homely pride to put herself in a false
position. They saw indeed only another reason to be grateful to me, and
another example of my surpassing kindness. Pretty, by no means a fool,
and gowned by the best coutourieres of Paris, Teresa made quite a hit,
and blossomed as girls do in the social sunshine. The following year, in
the whirl of a gay New York winter, one would scarcely have recognised
her as the same person. She had "made good," as boys say, and had
used my stepping-stones to carry her far beyond my ken. In her widening
interests, broader range, and increased worldly knowledge we became
naturally better friends than ever and met on the common ground of
those who led similar lives. What man would not value the intimacy of a
young, beautiful, and clever woman? in some ways it is better than love
itself, for love is a duel, with wounds given and taken, and its pleasures
dearly paid for. Between Teresa and myself there was no such disturbing
bond, and we were at liberty to be altogether frank in our intercourse.
One evening when I happened to be dining at the house, the absence of
her father and the indisposition of her mother left us tete-a- tete in the
smoking-room, whither she came to keep me company with my cigar. I
saw that she was restless and with something on her mind to tell me, but
I was too old a stager to force a confidence, least of all a woman's, and so
I waited, said nothing, and blew smoke rings.
"Hugo," she said, "there is something I wish to speak to you about."
"I've known that for the last hour, Teresa," I said.

"This is something serious," she said, looking at me strangely.
"Blaze away," I said.
"Hugo," she broke out, "you have been borrowing money from my
father."
I nodded.
"A great deal of money," she went on.
"For him--no," I said. "For me--well, yes."
"Eight or nine hundred dollars," she said.
"Those are about the figures," I returned. "Call it nine hundred."
"Oh, how could you! How could you!" she exclaimed.
I remained silent. In fact I did not know what to say.
"Don't you see the position you're putting yourself in?" she said.
"Position?" I repeated. "What position?"
"It's horrible, it's ignoble," she broke out. "I have always admired you for
the way you kept yourself clear of such an ambiguous relation--you've
known to the fraction of an inch what to take, what to refuse--to preserve
your self-respect--my respect--unimpaired. And here I see you slipping
into degradation. Oh, Hugo! I can't bear it."
"Is it such a crime to borrow a little money?" I asked.
"Not if you pay it back," she returned. "Not if you mean to pay it back.
But you know you can't. You know you won't!"
"You think it's the thin edge of the wedge?" I said. "The beginning of the
end and all that kind of thing?"

"You will go on," she cried. "You will become a dependent in this house, a
hanger-on, a sponger. I will hate you. You will hate yourself. It went
through me like a knife when I found it out."
I smoked my cigar in silence. I suppose she was quite right-- horribly
right, though I didn't like her any better for being so plain-spoken about
it. I felt myself turning red under her gaze.
"What do you want me to do?" I said at length.
"Pay it back," she said.
"I wish to God I could," I said. "But you know how I live, Teresa, hanging
on by the skin of my teeth--hardly able to keep my head above water, let
alone having a dollar to spare."
"Then you can't pay," she said.
"I don't think I can," I returned.
"Then you ought to leave this house," she said.
"You have certainly made it impossible for me to stay, Teresa," I said.
"I want to make it impossible," she cried. "You--you don't understand-you think I'm cruel--it's because I like you, Hugo-- it's because you're the
one man I admire above anybody in the world. I'd rather see you starving
than dishonoured."
"Thank you for your kind interest," I said ironically. "Under the
circumstances I am almost tempted to wish you admired me less."
"Am I not right?" she demanded.
"Perfectly right," I returned. "Oh, yes! Perfectly right."
"And you'll go," she said.
"Yes, I'll go," I said.
"And earn the money and pay father?" she went on.

"And earn the money and pay father," I repeated.
"And then come back?" she added.
"Never, never, never!" I cried out.
I could see her pale under the lights.
"Oh, Hugo! don't be so ungenerous," she said. "Don't be so--so----" She
hesitated, apparently unable to continue.
"Ungenerous or not," I said, "damn the words, Teresa, this isn't a time to
weigh words. It isn't in flesh and blood to come back. I can't come back.
Put yourself in my place."
"Some day you'll thank me," she said.
"Very possibly," I returned. "Nobody knows what may not happen. It's
conceivable, of course, I might go down on my bended knees, but really,
from the way I feel at this moment, I do not think it's likely."
"You want to punish me for liking you," she said.
"Teresa," I said, "I have told you already that you are right. You insist on
saving me from a humiliating position. I respect your courage and your
straightforwardness. You remind me of an ancient Spartan having it out
with a silly ass of a stranger who took advantage of her parents' goodnature. I am as little vain, I think, as any man, and as free from pettiness
and idiotic pride-- but you mustn't ask the impossible. You mustn't expect
the whipped dog to come back. When I go it will be for ever."
"Then go," she said, and looked me straight in the eyes.
"I have only one thing to ask," I said. "Smooth it over to your father and
mother. I am very fond of your father and mother, Teresa; I don't want
them to think I've acted badly, or that I have ceased to care for them.
Tell them the necessary lies, you know."
"I will tell them," she said.

"Then good-bye," I said, rising. "I suppose I am acting like a baby to feel
so sore. But I am hurt."
"Good-bye, Hugo," she said.
I went to the door and down the stairs. She followed and stood looking
after me the length of the hall as I slowly put on my hat and coat. That
was the last I saw of her, in the shadow of a palm, her girlish figure
outlined against the black behind. I walked into the street with a heart
like lead, and for the first time in my life I began to feel I was growing
old.
I have been from my youth up an easy-going man, a drifter, a dawdler,
always willing to put off work for play. But for once I pulled myself
together, looked things in the face, and put my back to the wheel. I was
determined to repay that nine hundred dollars, if I had to cut every
dinner-party for the rest of the season. I was determined to repay it, if I
had to work as I had never worked before. My first move was to change
my address. I didn't want Uncle Gingersnaps ferreting me out, and Mrs.
Grossensteck weeping on my shoulder. My next was to cancel my whole
engagement book. My third, to turn over my wares and to rack my head
for new ideas.
I had had a long-standing order from Granger's Weekly for a novelette. I
had always hated novelettes, as one had to wait so long for one's money
and then get so little; but in the humour I then found myself I plunged
into the fray, if not with enthusiasm, at least with a dogged perseverance
that was almost as good. Granger's Weekly liked triviality and dialogue, a
lot of fuss about nothing and a happy ending. I gave it to them in a
heaping measure. Dixie's Monthly, from which I had a short-story order,
set dialect above rubies. I didn't know any dialect, but I borrowed a year's
file and learned it like a lesson. They wrote and asked me for another on
the strength of "The Courting of Amandar Jane." The Permeator was keen
on Kipling and water, and I gave it to them--especially the water. Like all
Southern families the Dundonalds had once had their day. I had travelled
everywhere when I was a boy, and so I accordingly refreshed my dim
memories with some modern travellers and wrote a short series for The
Little Gentleman; "The Boy in the Carpathians," "The Boy in Old
Louisiana," "A Boy in the Tyrol," "A Boy in London," "A Boy in Paris," "A
Boy at the Louvre," "A Boy in Corsica," "A Boy in the Reconstruction." I
reeled off about twenty of them and sold them to advantage.

It was a terribly dreary task, and I had moments of revolt when I
stamped up and down my little flat and felt like throwing my resolution to
the winds. But I stuck tight to the ink-bottle and fought the thing through.
My novelette, strange to say, was good. Written against time and against
inclination, it has always been regarded since as the best thing I ever did,
and when published in book form outran three editions.
I made a thundering lot of money--for me, I mean, and in comparison to
my usual income--seldom under five hundred dollars a month and often
more. In eleven weeks I had repaid Grossensteck and had a credit in the
bank. Nine hundred dollars has always remained to me as a unit of value,
a sum of agonising significance not lightly to be spoken of, the fruits of
hellish industry and self-denial. All this while I had had never a word from
the Grossenstecks. At least they wrote to me often--telephoned-telegraphed--and my box at the club was choked with their letters. But I
did not open a single one of them, though I found a pleasure in turning
them over and over, and wondering as to what was within them. There
were several in Teresa's fine hand, and these interested me most of all
and tantalised me unspeakably. There was one of hers, cunningly
addressed to me in a stranger's writing that I opened inadvertently; but I
at once perceived the trick and had the strength of mind to throw it in the
fire unread.
Perhaps you will wonder at my childishness. Sometimes I wondered at it
myself. But the wound still smarted, and something stronger than I
seemed to withhold me from again breaking the ice. Besides, those long
lonely days, and those nights, almost as long in the retrospect, when I lay
sleepless on my bed, had shown me I had been drifting into another peril
no less dangerous than dependence. I had been thinking too much of the
girl for my own good, and our separation had brought me to a sudden
realisation of how deeply I was beginning to care for her. I hated her, too,
the pitiless wretch, so there was a double reason for me not to go back.
One night as I had dressed to dine out and stepped into the street,
looking up at the snow that hid the stars and silenced one's footsteps on
the pavement, a woman emerged from the gloom, and before I knew
what she was doing, had caught my arm. I shook her off, thinking her a
beggar or something worse, and would have passed on my way had she
not again struggled to detain me. I stopped, and was on the point of

roughly ordering her to let me go, when I looked down into her veiled
face and saw that it was Teresa Grossensteck.
"Hugo!" she said. "Hugo!"
I could only repeat her name and regard her helplessly.
"Hugo," she said, "I am cold. Take me upstairs. I am chilled through and
through."
"Oh, but Teresa," I expostulated, "it wouldn't be right. You know it
wouldn't be right. You might be seen."
She laid her hand, her ungloved, icy hand, against my cheek.
"I have been here an hour," she said. "Take me to your rooms. I am
freezing."
I led her up the stairs and to my little apartment. I seated her before the
fire, turned up the lights, and stood and looked at her.
"What have you come here for?" I said. "I've paid your father-- paid him
a month ago."
She made no answer, but spread her hands before the fire and shivered
in the glow. She kept her eyes fixed on the coals in front of her and put
out the tips of her little slippered feet. Then I perceived that she was in a
ball gown and that her arms were bare under her opera cloak.
At last she broke the silence.
"How cheerless your room is," she said, looking about. "Oh, how
cheerless!"
"Did you come here to tell me that?" I said.
"No," she said. "I don't know why I came. Because I was a fool, I
suppose--a fool to think you'd want to see me. Take me home, Hugo."
She rose as she said this and looked towards the door. I pressed her to
take a little whiskey, for she was still as cold as death and as white as the

snow queen in Hans Andersen's tale, but she refused to let me give her
any.
"Take me home, please," she repeated.
Her carriage was waiting a block away. Hendricks, the footman, received
my order with impassivity and shut us in together with the unconcern of a
good servant. It was dark in the carriage, and neither of us spoke as we
whirled through the snowy streets. Once the lights of a passing hansom
illumined my companion's face and I saw that she was crying. It pleased
me to see her suffer; she had cost me eleven weeks of misery; why
should she escape scot-free!
"Hugo," she said, "are you coming back to us, Hugo?"
"I don't know," I said.
"Why don't you know?" she asked.
"Oh, because!" I said.
"That's no answer," she said.
There was a pause.
"I was beginning to care too much about you," I said. "I think I was
beginning to fall in love with you. I've got out of one false position. Why
should I blunder into another?"
"Would it be a false position to love me?" she said.
"Of course that would a good deal depend on you," I said.
"Suppose I wanted you to," she said.
"Oh, but you couldn't!" I said.
"Why couldn't I?" she said.
"But forty," I objected; "nobody loves anybody who's forty, you know."

"I do," she said, "though, come to think of it, you were thirty- nine-when--when it first happened, Hugo."
I put out my arms in the dark and caught her to me. I could not believe
my own good fortune as I felt her trembling and crying against my breast.
I was humbled and ashamed. It was like a dream. An old fellow like me-forty, you know.
"It was a mighty near thing, Teresa," I said.
"I guess it was--for me!" she said.
"I meant myself, sweetheart," I said.
"For both of us then," she said, in a voice between laughter and tears,
and impulsively put her arms round my neck.

