The Silence
John Galsworthy

I
In a car of the Naples express a mining expert was diving into a bag for
papers. The strong sunlight showed the fine wrinkles on his brown face
and the shabbiness of his short, rough beard. A newspaper cutting slipped
from his fingers; he picked it up, thinking: 'How the dickens did that get
in here?' It was from a colonial print of three years back; and he sat
staring, as if in that forlorn slip of yellow paper he had encountered some
ghost from his past.
These were the words he read: "We hope that the setback to civilisation,
the check to commerce and development, in this promising centre of our
colony may be but temporary; and that capital may again come to the
rescue. Where one man was successful, others should surely not fail? We
are convinced that it only needs...." And the last words: "For what can be
sadder than to see the forest spreading its lengthening shadows, like
symbols of defeat, over the untenanted dwellings of men; and where was
once the merry chatter of human voices, to pass by in the silence...."
On an afternoon, thirteen years before, he had been in the city of London,
at one of those emporiums where mining experts perch, before fresh
flights, like sea-gulls on some favourite rock. A clerk said to him: "Mr.
Scorrier, they are asking for you downstairs--Mr. Hemmings of the New
Colliery Company."
Scorrier took up the speaking tube. "Is that you, Mr. Scorrier? I hope you
are very well, sir, I am--Hemmings--I am--coming up."
In two minutes he appeared, Christopher Hemmings, secretary of the
New Colliery Company, known in the City-behind his back--as "Down-bythe-starn" Hemmings. He grasped Scorrier's hand--the gesture was
deferential, yet distinguished. Too handsome, too capable, too important,
his figure, the cut of his iron-grey beard, and his intrusively fine eyes,

conveyed a continual courteous invitation to inspect their infallibilities. He
stood, like a City "Atlas," with his legs apart, his coat-tails gathered in his
hands, a whole globe of financial matters deftly balanced on his nose.
"Look at me!" he seemed to say. "It's heavy, but how easily I carry it. Not
the man to let it down, Sir!"
"I hope I see you well, Mr. Scorrier," he began. "I have come round about
our mine. There is a question of a fresh field being opened up--between
ourselves, not before it's wanted. I find it difficult to get my Board to take
a comprehensive view. In short, the question is: Are you prepared to go
out for us, and report on it? The fees will be all right." His left eye closed.
"Things have been very--er--dicky; we are going to change our
superintendent. I have got little Pippin--you know little Pippin?"
Scorrier murmured, with a feeling of vague resentment: "Oh yes. He's not
a mining man!"
Hemmings replied: "We think that he will do." 'Do you?' thought Scorrier;
'that's good of you!'
He had not altogether shaken off a worship he had felt for Pippin--"King"
Pippin he was always called, when they had been boys at the Camborne
Grammar-school. "King" Pippin! the boy with the bright colour, very
bright hair, bright, subtle, elusive eyes, broad shoulders, little stoop in the
neck, and a way of moving it quickly like a bird; the boy who was always
at the top of everything, and held his head as if looking for something
further to be the top of. He remembered how one day "King" Pippin had
said to him in his soft way, "Young Scorrie, I'll do your sums for you"; and
in answer to his dubious, "Is that all right?" had replied, "Of course--I
don't want you to get behind that beast Blake, he's not a Cornishman"
(the beast Blake was an Irishman not yet twelve). He remembered, too,
an occasion when "King" Pippin with two other boys fought six louts and
got a licking, and how Pippin sat for half an hour afterwards, all bloody,
his head in his hands, rocking to and fro, and weeping tears of
mortification; and how the next day he had sneaked off by himself, and,
attacking the same gang, got frightfully mauled a second time.
Thinking of these things he answered curtly: "When shall I start?"

"Down-by-the-starn" Hemmings replied with a sort of fearful
sprightliness: "There's a good fellow! I will send instructions; so glad to
see you well." Conferring on Scorrier a look--fine to the verge of
vulgarity--he withdrew. Scorrier remained, seated; heavy with
insignificance and vague oppression, as if he had drunk a tumbler of
sweet port.
A week later, in company with Pippin, he was on board a liner.
The "King" Pippin of his school-days was now a man of forty-four. He
awakened in Scorrier the uncertain wonder with which men look backward
at their uncomplicated teens; and staggering up and down the decks in
the long Atlantic roll, he would steal glances at his companion, as if he
expected to find out from them something about himself. Pippin had still
"King" Pippin's bright, fine hair, and dazzling streaks in his short beard;
he had still a bright colour and suave voice, and what there were of
wrinkles suggested only subtleties of humour and ironic sympathy. From
the first, and apparently without negotiation, he had his seat at the
captain's table, to which on the second day Scorrier too found himself
translated, and had to sit, as he expressed it ruefully, "among the bigwigs."
During the voyage only one incident impressed itself on Scorrier's
memory, and that for a disconcerting reason. In the forecastle were the
usual complement of emigrants. One evening, leaning across the rail to
watch them, he felt a touch on his arm; and, looking round, saw Pippin's
face and beard quivering in the lamplight. "Poor people!" he said. The
idea flashed on Scorrier that he was like some fine wire sound-recording
instrument.
'Suppose he were to snap!' he thought. Impelled to justify this fancy, he
blurted out: "You're a nervous chap. The way you look at those poor
devils!"
Pippin hustled him along the deck. "Come, come, you took me off my
guard," he murmured, with a sly, gentle smile, "that's not fair."

He found it a continual source of wonder that Pippin, at his age, should
cut himself adrift from the associations and security of London life to
begin a new career in a new country with dubious prospect of success. 'I
always heard he was doing well all round,' he thought; 'thinks he'll better
himself, perhaps. He's a true Cornishman.'
The morning of arrival at the mines was grey and cheerless; a cloud of
smoke, beaten down by drizzle, clung above the forest; the wooden
houses straggled dismally in the unkempt semblance of a street, against a
background of endless, silent woods. An air of blank discouragement
brooded over everything; cranes jutted idly over empty trucks; the long
jetty oozed black slime; miners with listless faces stood in the rain; dogs
fought under their very legs. On the way to the hotel they met no one
busy or serene except a Chinee who was polishing a dish-cover.
The late superintendent, a cowed man, regaled them at lunch with his
forebodings; his attitude toward the situation was like the food, which
was greasy and uninspiring. Alone together once more, the two
newcomers eyed each other sadly.
"Oh dear!" sighed Pippin. "We must change all this, Scorrier; it will never
do to go back beaten. I shall not go back beaten; you will have to carry
me on my shield;" and slyly: "Too heavy, eh? Poor fellow!" Then for a
long time he was silent, moving his lips as if adding up the cost. Suddenly
he sighed, and grasping Scorrier's arm, said: "Dull, aren't I? What will you
do? Put me in your report, 'New Superintendent--sad, dull dog--not a
word to throw at a cat!'" And as if the new task were too much for him,
he sank back in thought. The last words he said to Scorrier that night
were: "Very silent here. It's hard to believe one's here for life. But I feel I
am. Mustn't be a coward, though!" and brushing his forehead, as though
to clear from it a cobweb of faint thoughts, he hurried off.
Scorrier stayed on the veranda smoking. The rain had ceased, a few stars
were burning dimly; even above the squalor of the township the scent of
the forests, the interminable forests, brooded. There sprang into his mind
the memory of a picture from one of his children's fairy books--the picture
of a little bearded man on tiptoe, with poised head and a great sword,
slashing at the castle of a giant. It reminded him of Pippin. And suddenly,

even to Scorrier--whose existence was one long encounter with strange
places--the unseen presence of those woods, their heavy, healthy scent,
the little sounds, like squeaks from tiny toys, issuing out of the gloomy
silence, seemed intolerable, to be shunned, from the mere instinct of selfpreservation. He thought of the evening he had spent in the bosom of
"Down-by-the-starn" Hemmings' family, receiving his last instructions-the security of that suburban villa, its discouraging gentility; the superior
acidity of the Miss Hemmings; the noble names of large contractors, of
company promoters, of a peer, dragged with the lightness of guncarriages across the conversation; the autocracy of Hemmings, rasped up
here and there, by some domestic contradiction. It was all so nice and
safe--as if the whole thing had been fastened to an anchor sunk beneath
the pink cabbages of the drawing-room carpet! Hemmings, seeing him off
the premises, had said with secrecy: "Little Pippin will have a good thing.
We shall make his salary L----. He'll be a great man-quite a king. Ha-ha!"
Scorrier shook the ashes from his pipe. 'Salary!' he thought, straining his
ears; 'I wouldn't take the place for five thousand pounds a year. And yet
it's a fine country,' and with ironic violence he repeated, 'a dashed fine
country!'
Ten days later, having finished his report on the new mine, he stood on
the jetty waiting to go abroad the steamer for home.
"God bless you!" said Pippin. "Tell them they needn't be afraid; and
sometimes when you're at home think of me, eh?"
Scorrier, scrambling on board, had a confused memory of tears in his
eyes, and a convulsive handshake.

II
It was eight years before the wheels of life carried Scorrier back to that
disenchanted spot, and this time not on the business of the New Colliery
Company. He went for another company with a mine some thirty miles
away. Before starting, however, he visited Hemmings. The secretary was

surrounded by pigeon-holes and finer than ever; Scorrier blinked in the
full radiance of his courtesy. A little man with eyebrows full of questions,
and a grizzled beard, was seated in an arm-chair by the fire.
"You know Mr. Booker," said Hemmings--"one of my directors. This is Mr.
Scorrier, sir--who went out for us."
These sentences were murmured in a way suggestive of their uncommon
value. The director uncrossed his legs, and bowed. Scorrier also bowed,
and Hemmings, leaning back, slowly developed the full resources of his
waistcoat.
"So you are going out again, Scorrier, for the other side? I tell Mr.
Scorrier, sir, that he is going out for the enemy. Don't find them a mine
as good as you found us, there's a good man."
The little director asked explosively: "See our last dividend? Twenty per
cent; eh, what?"
Hemmings moved a finger, as if reproving his director. "I will not disguise
from you," he murmured, "that there is friction between us and--the
enemy; you know our position too well--just a little too well, eh? 'A nod's
as good as a wink.'"
His diplomatic eyes flattered Scorrier, who passed a hand over his brow-and said: "Of course."
"Pippin doesn't hit it off with them. Between ourselves, he's a leetle too
big for his boots. You know what it is when a man in his position gets a
sudden rise!"
Scorrier caught himself searching on the floor for a sight of Hemmings'
boots; he raised his eyes guiltily. The secretary continued: "We don't hear
from him quite as often as we should like, in fact."
To his own surprise Scorrier murmured: "It's a silent place!"

The secretary smiled. "Very good! Mr. Scorrier says, sir, it's a silent place;
ha-ha! I call that very good!" But suddenly a secret irritation seemed to
bubble in him; he burst forth almost violently: "He's no business to let it
affect him; now, has he? I put it to you, Mr. Scorrier, I put it to you, sir!"
But Scorrier made no reply, and soon after took his leave: he had been
asked to convey a friendly hint to Pippin that more frequent letters would
be welcomed. Standing in the shadow of the Royal Exchange, waiting to
thread his way across, he thought: 'So you must have noise, must you-you've got some here, and to spare....'
On his arrival in the new world he wired to Pippin asking if he might stay
with him on the way up country, and received the answer: "Be sure and
come."
A week later he arrived (there was now a railway) and found Pippin
waiting for him in a phaeton. Scorrier would not have known the place
again; there was a glitter over everything, as if some one had touched it
with a wand. The tracks had given place to roads, running firm, straight,
and black between the trees under brilliant sunshine; the wooden houses
were all painted; out in the gleaming harbour amongst the green of
islands lay three steamers, each with a fleet of busy boats; and here and
there a tiny yacht floated, like a sea-bird on the water. Pippin drove his
long-tailed horses furiously; his eyes brimmed with subtle kindness, as if
according Scorrier a continual welcome. During the two days of his stay
Scorrier never lost that sense of glamour. He had every opportunity for
observing the grip Pippin had over everything. The wooden doors and
walls of his bungalow kept out no sounds. He listened to interviews
between his host and all kinds and conditions of men. The voices of the
visitors would rise at first--angry, discontented, matter-of-fact, with nasal
twang, or guttural drawl; then would come the soft patter of the
superintendent's feet crossing and recrossing the room. Then a pause, the
sound of hard breathing, and quick questions--the visitor's voice again,
again the patter, and Pippin's ingratiating but decisive murmurs. Presently
out would come the visitor with an expression on his face which Scorrier
soon began to know by heart, a kind of pleased, puzzled, helpless look,
which seemed to say, "I've been done, I know--I'll give it to myself when
I'm round the corner."

Pippin was full of wistful questions about "home." He wanted to talk of
music, pictures, plays, of how London looked, what new streets there
were, and, above all, whether Scorrier had been lately in the West
Country. He talked of getting leave next winter, asked whether Scorrier
thought they would "put up with him at home"; then, with the agitation
which had alarmed Scorrier before, he added: "Ah! but I'm not fit for
home now. One gets spoiled; it's big and silent here. What should I go
back to? I don't seem to realise."
Scorrier thought of Hemmings. "'Tis a bit cramped there, certainly," he
muttered.
Pippin went on as if divining his thoughts. "I suppose our friend
Hemmings would call me foolish; he's above the little weaknesses of
imagination, eh? Yes; it's silent here. Sometimes in the evening I would
give my head for somebody to talk to--Hemmings would never give his
head for anything, I think. But all the same, I couldn't face them at home.
Spoiled!" And slyly he murmured: "What would the Board say if they
could hear that?"
Scorrier blurted out: "To tell you the truth, they complain a little of not
hearing from you."
Pippin put out a hand, as if to push something away. "Let them try the life
here!" he broke out; "it's like sitting on a live volcano--what with our
friends, 'the enemy,' over there; the men; the American competition. I
keep it going, Scorrier, but at what a cost--at what a cost!"
"But surely--letters?"
Pippin only answered: "I try--I try!"
Scorrier felt with remorse and wonder that he had spoken the truth. The
following day he left for his inspection, and while in the camp of "the
enemy" much was the talk he heard of Pippin.

"Why!" said his host, the superintendent, a little man with a face
somewhat like an owl's, "d'you know the name they've given him down in
the capital--'the King'--good, eh? He's made them 'sit up' all along this
coast. I like him well enough--good--hearted man, shocking nervous; but
my people down there can't stand him at any price. Sir, he runs this
colony. You'd think butter wouldn't melt in that mouth of his; but he
always gets his way; that's what riles 'em so; that and the success he's
making of his mine. It puzzles me; you'd think he'd only be too glad of a
quiet life, a man with his nerves. But no, he's never happy unless he's
fighting, something where he's got a chance to score a victory. I won't
say he likes it, but, by Jove, it seems he's got to do it. Now that's funny!
I'll tell you one thing, though shouldn't be a bit surprised if he broke down
some day; and I'll tell you another," he added darkly, "he's sailing very
near the wind, with those large contracts that he makes. I wouldn't care
to take his risks. Just let them have a strike, or something that shuts
them down for a spell--and mark my words, sir--it'll be all up with them.
But," he concluded confidentially, "I wish I had his hold on the men; it's a
great thing in this country. Not like home, where you can go round a
corner and get another gang. You have to make the best you can out of
the lot you have; you won't, get another man for love or money without
you ship him a few hundred miles." And with a frown he waved his arm
over the forests to indicate the barrenness of the land.

III
Scorrier finished his inspection and went on a shooting trip into the forest.
His host met him on his return. "Just look at this!" he said, holding out a
telegram. "Awful, isn't it?" His face expressed a profound commiseration,
almost ludicrously mixed with the ashamed contentment that men
experience at the misfortunes of an enemy.
The telegram, dated the day before, ran thus "Frightful explosion New
Colliery this morning, great loss of life feared."
Scorrier had the bewildered thought: 'Pippin will want me now.'

He took leave of his host, who called after him: "You'd better wait for a
steamer! It's a beastly drive!"
Scorrier shook his head. All night, jolting along a rough track cut through
the forest, he thought of Pippin. The other miseries of this calamity at
present left him cold; he barely thought of the smothered men; but
Pippin's struggle, his lonely struggle with this hydra-headed monster,
touched him very nearly. He fell asleep and dreamed of watching Pippin
slowly strangled by a snake; the agonised, kindly, ironic face peeping out
between two gleaming coils was so horribly real, that he awoke. It was
the moment before dawn: pitch-black branches barred the sky; with
every jolt of the wheels the gleams from the lamps danced, fantastic and
intrusive, round ferns and tree-stems, into the cold heart of the forest.
For an hour or more Scorrier tried to feign sleep, and hide from the
stillness, and overmastering gloom of these great woods. Then softly a
whisper of noises stole forth, a stir of light, and the whole slow radiance
of the morning glory. But it brought no warmth; and Scorrier wrapped
himself closer in his cloak, feeling as though old age had touched him.
Close on noon he reached the township. Glamour seemed still to hover
over it. He drove on to the mine. The winding-engine was turning, the
pulley at the top of the head-gear whizzing round; nothing looked
unusual. 'Some mistake!' he thought. He drove to the mine buildings,
alighted, and climbed to the shaft head. Instead of the usual rumbling of
the trolleys, the rattle of coal discharged over the screens, there was
silence. Close by, Pippin himself was standing, smirched with dirt. The
cage, coming swift and silent from below, shot open its doors with a sharp
rattle. Scorrier bent forward to look. There lay a dead man, with a smile
on his face.
"How many?" he whispered.
Pippin answered: "Eighty-four brought up--forty-seven still below," and
entered the man's name in a pocket-book.
An older man was taken out next; he too was smiling--there had been
vouchsafed to him, it seemed, a taste of more than earthly joy. The sight
of those strange smiles affected Scorrier more than all the anguish or

despair he had seen scored on the faces of other dead men. He asked an
old miner how long Pippin had been at work.
"Thirty hours. Yesterday he wer' below; we had to nigh carry mun up at
last. He's for goin' down again, but the chaps won't lower mun;" the old
man gave a sigh. "I'm waiting for my boy to come up, I am."
Scorrier waited too--there was fascination about those dead, smiling
faces. The rescuing of these men who would never again breathe went on
and on. Scorrier grew sleepy in the sun. The old miner woke him, saying:
"Rummy stuff this here chokedamp; see, they all dies drunk!" The very
next to be brought up was the chief engineer. Scorrier had known him
quite well, one of those Scotsmen who are born at the age of forty and
remain so all their lives. His face--the only one that wore no smile-seemed grieving that duty had deprived it of that last luxury. With wide
eyes and drawn lips he had died protesting.
Late in the afternoon the old miner touched Scorrier's arm, and said:
"There he is--there's my boy!" And he departed slowly, wheeling the body
on a trolley.
As the sun set, the gang below came up. No further search was possible
till the fumes had cleared. Scorrier heard one man say: "There's some
we'll never get; they've had sure burial."
Another answered him: "'Tis a gude enough bag for me!" They passed
him, the whites of their eyes gleaming out of faces black as ink.
Pippin drove him home at a furious pace, not uttering a single word. As
they turned into the main street, a young woman starting out before the
horses obliged Pippin to pull up. The glance he bent on Scorrier was
ludicrously prescient of suffering. The woman asked for her husband.
Several times they were stopped thus by women asking for their
husbands or sons. "This is what I have to go through," Pippin whispered.
When they had eaten, he said to Scorrier: "It was kind of you to come
and stand by me! They take me for a god, poor creature that I am. But

shall I ever get the men down again? Their nerve's shaken. I wish I were
one of those poor lads, to die with a smile like that!"
Scorrier felt the futility of his presence. On Pippin alone must be the heat
and burden. Would he stand under it, or would the whole thing come
crashing to the ground? He urged him again and again to rest, but Pippin
only gave him one of his queer smiles. "You don't know how strong I am!"
he said.

IV
He himself slept heavily; and, waking at dawn, went down. Pippin was still
at his desk; his pen had dropped; he was asleep. The ink was wet;
Scorrier's eye caught the opening words:
"GENTLEMEN,--Since this happened I have not slept...."
He stole away again with a sense of indignation that no one could be
dragged in to share that fight. The London Board-room rose before his
mind. He imagined the portentous gravity of Hemmings; his face and
voice and manner conveying the impression that he alone could save the
situation; the six directors, all men of commonsense and certainly
humane, seated behind large turret-shaped inkpots; the concern and
irritation in their voices, asking how it could have happened; their
comments: "An awful thing!" "I suppose Pippin is doing the best he can!"
"Wire him on no account to leave the mine idle!" "Poor devils!" "A fund?
Of course, what ought we to give?" He had a strong conviction that
nothing of all this would disturb the commonsense with which they would
go home and eat their mutton. A good thing too; the less it was taken to
heart the better! But Scorrier felt angry. The fight was so unfair! A fellow
all nerves--with not a soul to help him! Well, it was his own lookout! He
had chosen to centre it all in himself, to make himself its very soul. If he
gave way now, the ship must go down! By a thin thread, Scorrier's heroworship still held. 'Man against nature,' he thought, 'I back the man.' The
struggle in which he was so powerless to give aid, became intensely
personal to him, as if he had engaged his own good faith therein.

The next day they went down again to the pit-head; and Scorrier himself
descended. The fumes had almost cleared, but there were some places
which would never be reached. At the end of the day all but four bodies
had been recovered. "In the day o' judgment," a miner said, "they four'll
come out of here." Those unclaimed bodies haunted Scorrier. He came on
sentences of writing, where men waiting to be suffocated had written
down their feelings. In one place, the hour, the word "Sleepy," and a
signature. In another, "A. F.--done for." When he came up at last Pippin
was still waiting, pocket-book in hand; they again departed at a furious
pace.
Two days later Scorrier, visiting the shaft, found its neighbourhood
deserted--not a living thing of any sort was there except one Chinaman
poking his stick into the rubbish. Pippin was away down the coast
engaging an engineer; and on his return, Scorrier had not the heart to tell
him of the desertion. He was spared the effort, for Pippin said: "Don't be
afraid--you've got bad news? The men have gone on strike."
Scorrier sighed. "Lock, stock, and barrel"
"I thought so--see what I have here!" He put before Scorrier a telegram:
"At all costs keep working--fatal to stop--manage this somehow.-HEMMINGS."
Breathing quickly, he added: "As if I didn't know! 'Manage this somehow'-a little hard!"
"What's to be done?" asked Scorrier.
"You see I am commanded!" Pippin answered bitterly. "And they're quite
right; we must keep working--our contracts! Now I'm down--not a soul
will spare me!"
The miners' meeting was held the following day on the outskirts of the
town. Pippin had cleared the place to make a public recreation-ground--a

sort of feather in the company's cap; it was now to be the spot whereon
should be decided the question of the company's life or death.
The sky to the west was crossed by a single line of cloud like a bar of
beaten gold; tree shadows crept towards the groups of men; the evening
savour, that strong fragrance of the forest, sweetened the air. The miners
stood all round amongst the burnt tree-stumps, cowed and sullen. They
looked incapable of movement or expression. It was this dumb paralysis
that frightened Scorrier. He watched Pippin speaking from his phaeton,
the butt of all those sullen, restless eyes. Would he last out? Would the
wires hold? It was like the finish of a race. He caught a baffled look on
Pippin's face, as if he despaired of piercing that terrible paralysis. The
men's eyes had begun to wander. 'He's lost his hold,' thought Scorrier;
'it's all up!'
A miner close beside him muttered: "Look out!"
Pippin was leaning forward, his voice had risen, the words fell like a
whiplash on the faces of the crowd: "You shan't throw me over; do you
think I'll give up all I've done for you? I'll make you the first power in the
colony! Are you turning tail at the first shot? You're a set of cowards, my
lads!"
Each man round Scorrier was listening with a different motion of the
hands--one rubbed them, one clenched them, another moved his closed
fist, as if stabbing some one in the back. A grisly-bearded, beetle-browed,
twinkling-eyed old Cornishman muttered: "A'hm not troublin' about that."
It seemed almost as if Pippin's object was to get the men to kill him; they
had gathered closer, crouching for a rush. Suddenly Pippin's voice
dropped to a whisper: "I'm disgraced Men, are you going back on me?"
The old miner next Scorrier called out suddenly: "Anny that's Cornishmen
here to stand by the superintendent?" A group drew together, and with
murmurs and gesticulation the meeting broke up.
In the evening a deputation came to visit Pippin; and all night long their
voices and the superintendent's footsteps could be heard. In the morning,
Pippin went early to the mine. Before supper the deputation came again;

and again Scorrier had to listen hour after hour to the sound of voices and
footsteps till he fell asleep. Just before dawn he was awakened by a light.
Pippin stood at his bedside. "The men go down to-morrow," he said:
"What did I tell you? Carry me home on my shield, eh?"
In a week the mine was in full work.

V
Two years later, Scorrier heard once more of Pippin. A note from
Hemmings reached him asking if he could make it convenient to attend
their Board meeting the following Thursday. He arrived rather before the
appointed time. The secretary received him, and, in answer to inquiry,
said: "Thank you, we are doing well--between ourselves, we are doing
very well."
"And Pippin?"
The secretary frowned. "Ah, Pippin! We asked you to come on his
account. Pippin is giving us a lot of trouble. We have not had a single line
from him for just two years!" He spoke with such a sense of personal
grievance that Scorrier felt quite sorry for him. "Not a single line," said
Hemmings, "since that explosion--you were there at the time, I
remember! It makes it very awkward; I call it personal to me."
"But how--" Scorrier began.
"We get--telegrams. He writes to no one, not even to his family. And
why? Just tell me why? We hear of him; he's a great nob out there.
Nothing's done in the colony without his finger being in the pie. He turned
out the last Government because they wouldn't grant us an extension for
our railway--shows he can't be a fool. Besides, look at our balancesheet!"
It turned out that the question on which Scorrier's opinion was desired
was, whether Hemmings should be sent out to see what was the matter

with the superintendent. During the discussion which ensued, he was an
unwilling listener to strictures on Pippin's silence. "The explosion," he
muttered at last, "a very trying time!"
Mr. Booker pounced on him. "A very trying time! So it was--to all of us.
But what excuse is that--now, Mr. Scorrier, what excuse is that?"
Scorrier was obliged to admit that it was none.
"Business is business--eh, what?"
Scorrier, gazing round that neat Board-room, nodded. A deaf director,
who had not spoken for some months, said with sudden fierceness: "It's
disgraceful!" He was obviously letting off the fume of long-unuttered
disapprovals. One perfectly neat, benevolent old fellow, however, who
had kept his hat on, and had a single vice--that of coming to the Boardroom with a brown paper parcel tied up with string--murmured: "We must
make all allowances," and started an anecdote about his youth. He was
gently called to order by his secretary. Scorrier was asked for his opinion.
He looked at Hemmings. "My importance is concerned," was written all
over the secretary's face. Moved by an impulse of loyalty to Pippin,
Scorrier answered, as if it were all settled: "Well, let me know when you
are starting, Hemmings--I should like the trip myself."
As he was going out, the chairman, old Jolyon Forsyte, with a grave,
twinkling look at Hemmings, took him aside. "Glad to hear you say that
about going too, Mr. Scorrier; we must be careful--Pippin's such a good
fellow, and so sensitive; and our friend there--a bit heavy in the hand,
um?"
Scorrier did in fact go out with Hemmings. The secretary was sea-sick,
and his prostration, dignified but noisy, remained a memory for ever; it
was sonorous and fine--the prostration of superiority; and the way in
which he spoke of it, taking casual acquaintances into the caves of his
experience, was truly interesting.

Pippin came down to the capital to escort them, provided for their
comforts as if they had been royalty, and had a special train to take them
to the mines.
He was a little stouter, brighter of colour, greyer of beard, more nervous
perhaps in voice and breathing. His manner to Hemmings was full of
flattering courtesy; but his sly, ironical glances played on the secretary's
armour like a fountain on a hippopotamus. To Scorrier, however, he could
not show enough affection:
The first evening, when Hemmings had gone to his room, he jumped up
like a boy out of school. "So I'm going to get a wigging," he said; "I
suppose I deserve it; but if you knew--if you only knew...! Out here
they've nicknamed me 'the King'--they say I rule the colony. It's myself
that I can't rule"; and with a sudden burst of passion such as Scorrier had
never seen in him: "Why did they send this man here? What can he know
about the things that I've been through?" In a moment he calmed down
again. "There! this is very stupid; worrying you like this!" and with a long,
kind look into Scorrier's face, he hustled him off to bed.
Pippin did not break out again, though fire seemed to smoulder behind
the bars of his courteous irony. Intuition of danger had evidently smitten
Hemmings, for he made no allusion to the object of his visit. There were
moments when Scorrier's common-sense sided with Hemmings--these
were moments when the secretary was not present.
'After all,' he told himself, 'it's a little thing to ask--one letter a month. I
never heard of such a case.' It was wonderful indeed how they stood it! It
showed how much they valued Pippin! What was the matter with him?
What was the nature of his trouble? One glimpse Scorrier had when even
Hemmings, as he phrased it, received "quite a turn." It was during a drive
back from the most outlying of the company's trial mines, eight miles
through the forest. The track led through a belt of trees blackened by a
forest fire. Pippin was driving. The secretary seated beside him wore an
expression of faint alarm, such as Pippin's driving was warranted to evoke
from almost any face. The sky had darkened strangely, but pale streaks
of light, coming from one knew not where, filtered through the trees. No
breath was stirring; the wheels and horses' hoofs made no sound on the

deep fern mould. All around, the burnt tree-trunks, leafless and jagged,
rose like withered giants, the passages between them were black, the sky
black, and black the silence. No one spoke, and literally the only sound
was Pippin's breathing. What was it that was so terrifying? Scorrier had a
feeling of entombment; that nobody could help him; the feeling of being
face to face with Nature; a sensation as if all the comfort and security of
words and rules had dropped away from him. And-nothing happened.
They reached home and dined.
During dinner he had again that old remembrance of a little man chopping
at a castle with his sword. It came at a moment when Pippin had raised
his hand with the carving-knife grasped in it to answer some remark of
Hemmings' about the future of the company. The optimism in his uplifted
chin, the strenuous energy in his whispering voice, gave Scorrier a more
vivid glimpse of Pippin's nature than he had perhaps ever had before. This
new country, where nothing but himself could help a man--that was the
castle! No wonder Pippin was impatient of control, no wonder he was out
of hand, no wonder he was silent--chopping away at that! And suddenly
he thought: 'Yes, and all the time one knows, Nature must beat him in
the end!'
That very evening Hemmings delivered himself of his reproof. He had sat
unusually silent; Scorrier, indeed, had thought him a little drunk, so
portentous was his gravity; suddenly, however he rose. It was hard on a
man, he said, in his position, with a Board (he spoke as of a family of
small children), to be kept so short of information. He was actually
compelled to use his imagination to answer the shareholders' questions.
This was painful and humiliating; he had never heard of any secretary
having to use his imagination! He went further--it was insulting! He had
grown grey in the service of the company. Mr. Scorrier would bear him
out when he said he had a position to maintain--his name in the City was
a high one; and, by George! he was going to keep it a high one; he would
allow nobody to drag it in the dust--that ought clearly to be understood.
His directors felt they were being treated like children; however that
might be, it was absurd to suppose that he (Hemmings) could be treated
like a child...! The secretary paused; his eyes seemed to bully the room.

"If there were no London office," murmured Pippin, "the shareholders
would get the same dividends."
Hemmings gasped. "Come!" he said, "this is monstrous!"
"What help did I get from London when I first came here? What help have
I ever had?"
Hemmings swayed, recovered, and with a forced smile replied that, if this
were true, he had been standing on his head for years; he did not believe
the attitude possible for such a length of time; personally he would have
thought that he too had had a little something to say to the company's
position, but no matter...! His irony was crushing.... It was possible that
Mr. Pippin hoped to reverse the existing laws of the universe with regard
to limited companies; he would merely say that he must not begin with a
company of which he (Hemmings) happened to be secretary. Mr. Scorrier
had hinted at excuses; for his part, with the best intentions in the world,
he had great difficulty in seeing them. He would go further--he did not
see them! The explosion...! Pippin shrank so visibly that Hemmings
seemed troubled by a suspicion that he had gone too far.
"We know," he said, "that it was trying for you...."
"Trying!" "burst out Pippin.
"No one can say," Hemmings resumed soothingly, "that we have not dealt
liberally." Pippin made a motion of the head. "We think we have a good
superintendent; I go further, an excellent superintendent. What I say is:
Let's be pleasant! I am not making an unreasonable request!" He ended
on a fitting note of jocularity; and, as if by consent, all three withdrew,
each to his own room, without another word.
In the course of the next day Pippin said to Scorrier: "It seems I have
been very wicked. I must try to do better"; and with a touch of bitter
humour, "They are kind enough to think me a good superintendent, you
see! After that I must try hard."

Scorrier broke in: "No man could have done so much for them;" and,
carried away by an impulse to put things absolutely straight, went on
"But, after all, a letter now and then--what does it amount to?"
Pippin besieged him with a subtle glance. "You too?" he said--"I must
indeed have been a wicked man!" and turned away.
Scorrier felt as if he had been guilty of brutality; sorry for Pippin, angry
with himself; angry with Pippin, sorry for himself. He earnestly desired to
see the back of Hemmings. The secretary gratified the wish a few days
later, departing by steamer with ponderous expressions of regard and the
assurance of his goodwill.
Pippin gave vent to no outburst of relief, maintaining a courteous silence,
making only one allusion to his late guest, in answer to a remark of
Scorrier:
"Ah! don't tempt me! mustn't speak behind his back."

VI
A month passed, and Scorrier still--remained Pippin's guest. As each mailday approached he experienced a queer suppressed excitement. On one
of these occasions Pippin had withdrawn to his room; and when Scorrier
went to fetch him to dinner he found him with his head leaning on his
hands, amid a perfect fitter of torn paper. He looked up at Scorrier.
"I can't do it," he said, "I feel such a hypocrite; I can't put myself into
leading-strings again. Why should I ask these people, when I've settled
everything already? If it were a vital matter they wouldn't want to hear-they'd simply wire, 'Manage this somehow!'"
Scorrier said nothing, but thought privately 'This is a mad business!' What
was a letter? Why make a fuss about a letter? The approach of mail-day
seemed like a nightmare to the superintendent; he became feverishly
nervous like a man under a spell; and, when the mail had gone, behaved

like a respited criminal. And this had been going on two years! Ever since
that explosion. Why, it was monomania!
One day, a month after Hemmings' departure, Pippin rose early from
dinner; his face was flushed, he had been drinking wine. "I won't be
beaten this time," he said, as he passed Scorrier. The latter could hear
him writing in the next room, and looked in presently to say that he was
going for a walk. Pippin gave him a kindly nod.
It was a cool, still evening: innumerable stars swarmed in clusters over
the forests, forming bright hieroglyphics in the middle heavens, showering
over the dark harbour into the sea. Scorrier walked slowly. A weight
seemed lifted from his mind, so entangled had he become in that uncanny
silence. At last Pippin had broken through the spell. To get that, letter
sent would be the laying of a phantom, the rehabilitation of
commonsense. Now that this silence was in the throes of being broken,
he felt curiously tender towards Pippin, without the hero-worship of old
days, but with a queer protective feeling. After all, he was different from
other men. In spite of his feverish, tenacious energy, in spite of his ironic
humour, there was something of the woman in him! And as for this
silence, this horror of control--all geniuses had "bees in their bonnets,"
and Pippin was a genius in his way!
He looked back at the town. Brilliantly lighted it had a thriving air-difficult
to believe of the place he remembered ten years back; the sounds of
drinking, gambling, laughter, and dancing floated to his ears. 'Quite a
city!' he thought.
With this queer elation on him he walked slowly back along the street,
forgetting that he was simply an oldish mining expert, with a look of
shabbiness, such as clings to men who are always travelling, as if their
"nap" were for ever being rubbed off. And he thought of Pippin, creator of
this glory.
He had passed the boundaries of the town, and had entered the forest. A
feeling of discouragement instantly beset him. The scents and silence,
after the festive cries and odours of the town, were undefinably
oppressive. Notwithstanding, he walked a long time, saying to himself

that he would give the letter every chance. At last, when he thought that
Pippin must have finished, he went back to the house.
Pippin had finished. His forehead rested on the table, his arms hung at his
sides; he was stone-dead! His face wore a smile, and by his side lay an
empty laudanum bottle.
The letter, closely, beautifully written, lay before him. It was a fine
document, clear, masterly, detailed, nothing slurred, nothing concealed,
nothing omitted; a complete review of the company's position; it ended
with the words: "Your humble servant, RICHARD PIPPIN."
Scorrier took possession of it. He dimly understood that with those last
words a wire had snapped. The border-line had been overpassed; the
point reached where that sense of proportion, which alone makes life
possible, is lost. He was certain that at the moment of his death Pippin
could have discussed bimetallism, or any intellectual problem, except the
one problem of his own heart; that, for some mysterious reason, had
been too much for him. His death had been the work of a moment of
supreme revolt--a single instant of madness on a single subject! He found
on the blotting-paper, scrawled across the impress of the signature,
"Can't stand it!" The completion of that letter had been to him a struggle
ungraspable by Scorrier. Slavery? Defeat? A violation of Nature? The
death of justice? It were better not to think of it! Pippin could have told-but he would never speak again. Nature, at whom, unaided, he had dealt
so many blows, had taken her revenge...!
In the night Scorrier stole down, and, with an ashamed face, cut off a lock
of the fine grey hair. 'His daughter might like it!' he thought....
He waited till Pippin was buried, then, with the letter in his pocket, started
for England.
He arrived at Liverpool on a Thursday morning, and travelling to town,
drove straight to the office of the company. The Board were sitting.
Pippin's successor was already being interviewed. He passed out as
Scorrier came in, a middle-aged man with a large, red beard, and a foxy,

compromising face. He also was a Cornishman. Scorrier wished him luck
with a very heavy heart.
As an unsentimental man, who had a proper horror of emotion, whose
living depended on his good sense, to look back on that interview with the
Board was painful. It had excited in him a rage of which he was now
heartily ashamed. Old Jolyon Forsyte, the chairman, was not there for
once, guessing perhaps that the Board's view of this death would be too
small for him; and little Mr. Booker sat in his place. Every one had risen,
shaken hands with Scorrier, and expressed themselves indebted for his
coming. Scorrier placed Pippin's letter on the table, and gravely the
secretary read out to his Board the last words of their superintendent.
When he had finished, a director said, "That's not the letter of a
madman!" Another answered: "Mad as a hatter; nobody but a madman
would have thrown up such a post." Scorrier suddenly withdrew. He heard
Hemmings calling after him. "Aren't you well, Mr. Scorrier? aren't you
well, sir?"
He shouted back: "Quite sane, I thank you...."
The Naples "express" rolled round the outskirts of the town. Vesuvius
shone in the sun, uncrowned by smoke. But even as Scorrier looked, a
white puff went soaring up. It was the footnote to his memories.

