Marjory
By F. Antsey
I have thought myself justified in printing the following narrative, found
among the papers of my dead friend, Douglas Cameron, who left me
discretion to deal with them as I saw fit. It was written indeed, as its
opening words imply, rather for his own solace and relief than with the
expectation that it would be read by any other. But, painful and intimate
as it is in parts, I cannot think that any harm will be done by printing it
now, with some necessary alterations in the names of the characters
chiefly concerned.
Before, however, leaving the story to speak for itself, I should like to
state, in justice to my friend, that during the whole of my acquaintance
with him, which began in our college days, I never saw anything to
indicate the morbid timidity and weakness of character that seem to have
marked him as a boy. Reserved he undoubtedly was, with a taste for
solitude that made him shrink from the society of all but a small circle,
and with a sensitive and shy nature which prevented him from doing
himself complete justice; but he was very capable of holding his own on
occasion, and in his disposition, as I knew it, there was no want of moral
courage, nor any trace of effeminacy.
How far he may have unconsciously exaggerated such failings in the
revelation of his earlier self, or what the influence of such an experience
as he relates may have done to strengthen the moral fibre, are points on
which I can express no opinion, any more than I can pledge myself to the
credibility of the supernatural element of his story.
It may be that only in the boy's overwrought imagination, the innocent
Child-spirit came back to complete the work of love and pity she had
begun in life; but I know that he himself believed otherwise, and, truly, if
those who leave us are permitted to return at all, it must be on some
such errand as Marjory's.
Douglas Cameron's life was short, and in it, so far as I am aware, he met
no one who at all replaced his lost ideal. Of this I cannot be absolutely
certain, for he was a reticent man in such matters; but I think, had it
been so, I should have known of it, for we were very close friends. One

would hardly expect, perhaps, that an ordinary man would remain faithful
all his days to the far-off memory of a child-love; but then Cameron was
not quite as other men, nor were his days long in the land.
And if this ideal of his was never dimmed for him by some grosser, and
less spiritual, passion, who shall say that he may not have been a better
and even a happier man in consequence.
*****
It is not without an effort that I have resolved to break, in the course of
this narrative, the reserve maintained for nearly twenty years. But the
chief reason for silence is removed now that all those are gone who might
have been pained or harmed by what I have to tell, and, though I shrink
still from reviving certain memories that are fraught with pain, there are
others associated therewith which will surely bring consolation and relief.
I must have been about eleven at the time I am speaking of, and the
change which--for good or ill--comes over most boys' lives had not yet
threatened mine. I had not left home for school, nor did it seem at all
probable then that I should ever do so.
When I read (I was a great reader) of Dotheboys Hall and Salem House-a combination of which establishments formed my notion of school-life--it
was with no more personal interest than a cripple might feel in perusing
the notice of an impending conscription; for from the battles of school-life
I was fortunately exempted.
I was the only son of a widow, and we led a secluded life in a London
suburb. My mother took charge of my education herself, and, as far as
mere acquirements went, I was certainly not behind other boys of my
age. I owe too much to that loving and careful training, Heaven knows, to
think of casting any reflection upon it here, but my surroundings were
such as almost necessarily to exclude all bracing and hardening
influences.
My mother had few friends; we were content with our own
companionship, and of boys I knew and cared to know nothing; in fact, I
regarded a strange boy with much the same unreasoning aversion as
many excellent women feel for the most ordinary cow.

I was happy to think that I should never be called upon to associate with
them; by-and-by, when I outgrew my mother's teaching, I was to have a
tutor, perhaps even go to college in time, and when I became a man I
was to be a curate and live with my mother in a clematis-covered cottage
in some pleasant village.
She would often dwell on this future with a tender prospective pride; she
spoke of it on the very day that saw it shattered for ever.
For there came a morning when, on going to her with my lessons for the
day, I was gladdened with an unexpected holiday. I little knew then-though I was to learn it soon enough--that my lessons had been all
holidays, or that on that day they were to end for ever.
My mother had had one or two previous attacks of an illness which
seemed to prostrate her for a short period, and as she soon regained her
ordinary health, I did not think they could be of a serious nature.
So I devoted my holiday cheerfully enough to the illumination of a text,
on the gaudy colouring of which I found myself gazing two days later with
a dull wonder, as at the work of a strange hand in a long dead past, for
the boy who had painted that was a happy boy who had a mother, and for
two endless days I had been alone.
Those days, and many that followed, come back to me now but vaguely. I
passed them mostly in a state of blank bewilderment caused by the
double sense of sameness and strangeness in everything around me;
then there were times when this gave way to a passionate anguish which
refused all attempts at comfort, and times even--but very, very seldom-when I almost forgot what had happened to me.
Our one servant remained in the house with me, and a friend and
neighbour of my mother's was constant in her endeavours to relieve my
loneliness; but I was impatient of them, I fear, and chiefly anxious to be
left alone to indulge my melancholy unchecked.
I remember how, as autumn began, and leaf after leaf fluttered down
from the trees in our little garden, I watched them fall with a heavier
heart, for they had known my mother, and now they, too, were deserting
me.

This morbid state of mind had lasted quite long enough when my uncle,
who was my guardian, saw fit to put a summary end to it by sending me
to school forthwith; he would have softened the change for me by taking
me to his own home first, but there was illness of some sort there, and
this was out of the question.
I was neither sorry nor glad when I heard of it, for all places were the
same to me just then; only, as the time drew near, I began to regard the
future with a growing dread.
The school was at some distance from London, and my uncle took me
down by rail; but the only fact I remember connected with the journey is
that there was a boy in the carriage with us who cracked walnuts all the
way, and I wondered if he was going to school too, and concluded that he
was not, or he would hardly eat quite so many walnuts.
Later we were passing through some wrought-iron gates, and down an
avenue of young chestnuts, which made a gorgeous autumn canopy of
scarlet, amber, and orange, up to a fine old red-brick house, with a highpitched roof, and a cupola in which a big bell hung, tinted a warm gold by
the afternoon sun.
This was my school, and it did not look so very-terrible after all. There
was a big bow-window by the pillared portico, and, looking timidly in, I
saw a girl of about my own age sitting there, absorbed in the book she
was reading, her long brown hair drooping over her cheek and the hand
on which it rested.
She glanced up at the sound of the door-bell, and I felt her eyes
examining me seriously and critically, and then I forgot everything but
the fact that I was about to be introduced to my future schoolmaster, the
Rev. Basil Dering.
This was less of an ordeal than I had expected; he had a strong,
massively-cut, leonine face, free and abundant white hair, streaked with
dark grey, but there was a kind light in his eyes as I looked up at them,
and the firm mouth could smile, I found, pleasantly enough.
Mrs. Dering seemed younger, and was handsome, with a certain
stateliness and decision of manner which put me less at my ease, and I

was relieved to be told I might say good-bye to my uncle, and wander
about the grounds as I liked.
I was not surprised to pass through an empty schoolroom, and to descend
by some steep stairs to a deserted playground, for we had been already
told that the Michaelmas holidays were not over, and that the boys would
not return for some days to come.
It gave me a kind of satisfaction to think of my resemblance, just then, to
my favourite David Copperfield, but I was to have a far pleasanter
companion than poor lugubrious, flute-tootling Mr. Mell, for as I paced the
damp paths paved with a mosaic of russet and yellow leaves, I heard light
footsteps behind me, and turned to find myself face to face with the girl I
had seen at the window.
She stood there breathless for an instant, for she had hurried to overtake
me, and against a background of crimson creepers I saw the brilliant face,
with its soft but fearless brown eyes, small straight nose, spirited mouth,
and crisp wavy golden-brown hair, which I see now almost as distinctly as
I write.
'You're the new boy,' she said at length. 'I've come out to make you feel
more at home. I suppose you don't feel _quite_ at home just yet?'
'Not quite, thank you,' I said, lifting my cap with ceremony, for I had
been taught to be particular about my manners; 'I have never been to
school before, you see, Miss Dering.'
I think she was a little puzzled by so much politeness. 'I know,' she said
softly; 'mother told me about it, and I'm very sorry. And I'm called
Marjory, generally. Shall you like school, do you think?'
'I might,' said I, 'if--if it wasn't for the boys!'
'Boys aren't bad,' she said; 'ours are rather nice, I think. But perhaps you
don't know many?'
'I know one,' I replied.
'How old is _he_?' she wished to know.

'Not very old--about three, I think,' I said. I had never wished till then
that my only male acquaintance had been of less tender years, but I felt
now that he was rather small, and saw that Marjory was of the same
opinion.
'Why, he's only a baby!' she said; 'I thought you meant a _real_ boy. And
is that all the boys you know? Are you fond of games?'
'Some games--very,' said I.
'What's your favourite game?' she demanded.
'Bezique,' I answered, 'or draughts.'
'I meant _out_door games; draughts are indoor games--_is_ indoor
games, I mean--no, _are_ an indoor game--and _that_ doesn't sound
grammar! But haven't you ever played cricket? Not ever, really? I like it
dreadfully myself, only I'm not allowed to play with the boys, and I'm
sure I can bat well enough for the second eleven--Cartwright said I could
last term--and I can bowl round-hand, and it's all no use, just because I
was born a girl! Wouldn't you like a game at something? They haven't
taken in the croquet hoops yet; shall we play at that?'
But again I had to confess my ignorance of what was then the popular
garden game.
'What do you generally do to amuse yourself, then?' she inquired.
'I read, generally, or paint texts or outlines. Sometimes'--(I thought this
accomplishment would surely appeal to her)--'sometimes I do woolwork!'
'I don't think I would tell the boys that,' she advised rather gravely; she
evidently considered me a very desperate case. 'It's such a pity, your not
knowing any games. Suppose I taught you croquet, now? It would be
something to go on with, and you'll soon learn if you pay attention and do
exactly what I tell you.'
I submitted myself meekly to her direction, and Marjory enjoyed her
office of instructress for a time, until my extreme slowness wore out her
patience, and she began to make little murmurs of disgust, for which she
invariably apologised. 'That's enough for to-day!' she said at last, 'I'll take

you again to-morrow. But you really must try and pick up games,
Cameron, or you'll never be liked. Let me see, I wonder if there's time to
teach you a little football. I think I could do that.'
Before she could make any further arrangements the tea-bell rang, but
when I lay down that night in my strange cold bed, hemmed round by
other beds, which were only less formidable than if they had been
occupied, I did not feel so friendless as I might have done, and dreamed
all night that Marjory was teaching me something I understood to be
cricket, which, however, was more like a bloated kind of backgammon.
The next day Marjory was allowed to go out walking with me, and I came
home feeling that I had known her for quite a long time, while her
manner to me had acquired a tone even more protecting than before, and
she began to betray an anxiety as to my school prospects which filled me
with uneasiness.
'I am so afraid the boys won't like the way you talk,' she said on one
occasion.
'I used to be told I spoke very correctly,' I said, verdantly enough.
'But not like boys talk. You see, Cameron, I ought to know, with such a
lot of them about. I tell you what I could do, though--I could teach you
most of their words--only I must run and ask mother first if I may.
Teaching slang isn't the same as using it on my own account, is it?'
Marjory darted off impulsively to ask leave, to return presently with a
slow step and downcast face. 'I mayn't,' she announced. 'Mother says
"Certainly not," so there's an end of that! Still, I think myself it's a
decided pity.'
And more than once that day she would observe, as if to herself, 'I do
wish they had let him come to school in different collars!'
I knew that these remarks, and others of a similar tendency, were
prompted by her interest in my welfare, and I admired her too heartily
already to be offended by them: still, I cannot say they added to my
peace of mind.

And on the last evening of the holidays she said 'Good-night' to me with
some solemnity. 'Everything will be different after this,' she said; 'I shan't
be able to see nearly so much of you, because I'm not allowed to be
much with the boys. But I shall be looking after you all the time,
Cameron, and seeing how you get on. And oh! I do hope you will try to be
a popular kind of boy!'
*****
I'm afraid I must own that this desire of Marjory's was not realised. I do
not know that I tried to be--and I certainly was not--a popular boy.
The other boys, I now know, were by no means bad specimens of the
English schoolboy, as will be evident when I state that, for a time, my
deep mourning was held by them to give me a claim to their forbearance.
But I had an unfortunate tendency to sudden floods of tears (apparently
for no cause whatever, really from some secret spring of association, such
as I remember was touched when I first found myself learning Latin from
the same primer over which my mother and I had puzzled together), and
these outbursts at first aroused my companions' contempt, and finally
their open ridicule.
I could not conceal my shrinking dislike to their society, which was not
calculated to make them more favourably disposed towards me; while my
tastes, my expressions, my ways of looking at things, were all at total
variance with their own standards.
The general disapproval might well have shown itself in a harsher manner
than that of merely ignoring my existence--and it says much for the tone
of the school that it did not; unfortunately, I felt their indifference almost
as keenly as I had dreaded their notice.
From my masters I met with more favour, for I had been thoroughly well
grounded, and found, besides, a temporary distraction in my school-work;
but this was hardly likely to render me more beloved by my fellows, and
so it came to pass that every day saw my isolation more complete.
Something, however, made me anxious to hide this from Marjory's eyes,
and whenever she happened to be looking on at us in the school grounds
or the playing fields, I made dismal attempts to appear on terms of

equality with the rest, and would hang about a group with as much
pretence of belonging to it as I thought at all prudent.
If she had had more opportunities of questioning me, she would have
found me out long before; as it was, the only occasion on which we were
near one another was at the weekly drawing lesson, when, although she
drew less and talked more than the Professor quite approved of, she was
obliged to restrict herself to a conversation which did not admit of
confidences.
But this negative neutral-tinted misery was not to last; I was harmless
enough, but then to some natures nothing is so offensive as
inoffensiveness. My isolation was certain to raise me up an enemy in
time, and he came in the person of one Clarence Ormsby.
He was a sturdy, good-looking fellow, about two years older than myself,
good at games, and, though not brilliant in other respects, rather idle
than dull. He was popular in the school, and I believe his general
disposition was by no means bad; but there must have been some hidden
flaw in his nature which might never have disclosed itself for any other
but me.
For me he had displayed, almost from the first, one of those special
antipathies that want but little excuse to ripen into hatred. My personal
appearance--I had the misfortune to be a decidedly plain boy--happened
to be particularly displeasing to him, and, as he had an unsparing tongue,
he used it to cover me with ridicule, until gradually, finding that I did not
retaliate, he indulged in acts of petty oppression which, though not
strictly bullying, were even more harassing and humiliating.
I suspect now that if I had made ever so slight a stand at the outset, I
should have escaped further molestation, but I was not pugnacious by
nature, and never made the experiment; partly, probably, from a theory
on which I had been reared, that all violence was vulgar, but chiefly from
a tendency, unnatural in one of my age and sex, to find a sentimental
satisfaction in a certain degree of unhappiness.
So that I can neither pity myself nor expect pity from others for woes
which were so essentially my own creation, though they resulted, alas! in
misery that was real enough.

It was inevitable that quick-sighted Marjory should discover the
subjection into which I had fallen, and her final enlightenment was
brought about in this manner. Ormsby and I were together alone, shortly
before morning school, and he came towards me with an exercise of mine
from which he had just been copying his own, for we were in the same
classes, despite the difference in our ages, and he was in the habit of
profiting thus by my industry.
'Thanks, Cameron,' he said, with a sweetness which I distrusted, for he
was not as a rule so lavish in his gratitude. 'I've copied out that exercise
of yours, but it's written so beastly badly that you'd better do it over
again.'
With which he deliberately tore the page he had been copying from to
scraps, which he threw in my face, and strolled out down to the
playground.
I was preparing submissively to do the exercise over again as well as I
could in the short time that was left, when I was startled by a low cry of
indignation, and, looking round, saw Marjory standing in the doorway,
and knew by her face that she had seen all.
'Has Ormsby done that to you before?' she inquired.
'Once or twice he has,' said I.
'And you let him!' she cried. 'Oh, Cameron!'
'What can I do?' I said.
'I know what _I_ would do,' she replied. 'I would slap his face, or pinch
him. I wouldn't put up with it!'
'Boys don't slap one another, or pinch,' I said, not displeased to find a
weak place in her knowledge of us.
'Well, they do _something_!' she said; 'a real boy would. But I don't think
you are a real boy, Cameron. _I'll_ show you what to do. Where's the
exercise that--that _pig_ copied? Ah! I see it. And now--look!' (Here she
tore his page as he had torn mine.)

'Now for an envelope!' and from the Doctor's own desk she took an
envelope, in which she placed the fragments, and wrote on the outside in
her round, childish hand: 'With Marjory's compliments, for being a bully.'
'He won't do that again,' she said gleefully.
'He'll do worse,' I said in dismay; 'I shall have to pay for it. Marjory, why
didn't you leave things alone? I didn't complain--you know I didn't.'
She turned upon me, as well she might, in supreme disdain. 'Oh! what a
coward you are! I wouldn't believe all Cartwright told me about you when
I asked--but I see it's all true. Why don't you stick up for yourself?'
I muttered something or other.
'But you _ought_ to. You'll never get on unless,' said Marjory, very
decidedly. 'Now, promise me you will, next time.'
I sat there silent. I was disgusted with myself, and meanly angry with her
for having rendered me so.
'Then, listen,' she said impressively. 'I promised I would look after you,
and I did mean to, but it's no use if you won't help yourself. So, unless
you say you won't go on being a coward any more, I shall have to leave
you to your own way, and not take the least interest in you ever again.'
'Then, you may,' I said stolidly; 'I don't care.' I wondered, even while I
spoke the words, what could be impelling me to treat spirited, warmhearted Marjory like that, and I hate myself still at the recollection.
'Good-bye, then,' she said very quietly; 'I'm sorry, Cameron.' And she
went out without another word.
When Ormsby came in, I watched him apprehensively as he read the
envelope upon his desk and saw its contents. He said nothing, however,
though he shot a malignant glance in my direction; but the lesson was not
lost upon him, for from that time he avoided all open ill-treatment of me,
and even went so far as to assume a friendliness which might have
reassured me had I not instinctively felt that it merely masked the old
dislike.

I was constantly the victim of mishaps, in the shape of missing and
defaced books, ink mysteriously spilt or strangely adulterated, and,
though I could never trace them to any definite hand, they seemed too
systematic to be quite accidental; still I made no sign, and hoped thus to
disarm my persecutor--if persecutor there were.
As for my companions, I knew that in no case would they take the trouble
to interfere in my behalf; they had held aloof from the first, the general
opinion (which I now perceive was not unjust) being that 'I deserved all I
got.'
And my estrangement from Marjory grew wider and wider; she never
spoke to me now when we sat near one another at the drawing-class; if
she looked at me it was by stealth, and with a glance that I thought
sometimes was contemptuously pitiful, and sometimes half fancied
betrayed a willingness to return to the old comradeship.
But I nursed my stupid, sullen pride, though my heart ached with it at
times. For I had now come to love Marjory devotedly, with a love that,
though I was a boy and she was a child, was as genuine as any I am ever
likely to feel again.
The chance of seeing her now and then, of hearing her speak--though it
was not to me--gave me the one interest in my life, which, but for her, I
could hardly have borne. But this love of mine was a very far-off and
disinterested worship after all. I could not imagine myself ever speaking
of it to her, or picture her as accepting it. Marjory was too thorough a
child to be vulgarised in that way, even in thought.
The others were healthy, matter-of-fact youths, to whom Marjory was an
ordinary girl, and who certainly did not indulge in any strained sentiment
respecting her; it was left for me to idealise her; but of that, at least, I
cannot feel ashamed, or believe that it did me anything but good.
And the days went on, until it wanted but a fortnight to Christmas, and
most of us were thinking of the coming holidays, and preparing with a not
unpleasant excitement for the examinations, which were all that barred
the way to them now. I was to spend my Christmas with my uncle and
cousins, who would by that time be able to receive me; but I felt no very
pleasurable anticipations, for my cousins were all boys, and from boys I
thought I knew what to expect.

One afternoon Ormsby came to me with the request that I would execute
a trifling commission for him in the adjoining village; he himself, he said,
was confined to bounds, but he had a shilling he wanted to lay out at a
small fancy-shop we were allowed to patronise, and he considered me the
best person to be entrusted with that coin. I was simply to spend the
money on anything I thought best, for he had entire confidence, he gave
me to understand, in my taste and judgment. I think I suspected a design
of some sort, but I did not dare to refuse, and then his manner to some
extent disarmed me.
I took the shilling, therefore, with which I bought some article--I forget
what--and got back to the school at dusk. The boys had all gone down to
tea except Ormsby, who was waiting for me up in the empty schoolroom.
'Well?' he said, and I displayed my purchase, only to find that I had fallen
into a trap.
When I think how easily I was the dupe of that not too subtle artifice,
which was only half malicious, I could smile, if I did not know how it
ended.
'How much was that?' he asked contemptuously, 'twopence-halfpenny?
Well, if you choose to give a shilling for it, I'm not going to pay, that's all.
So just give me back my shilling!'
Now, as my weekly allowance consisted of threepence, which was
confiscated for some time in advance (as I think he knew), to provide
fines for my mysteriously-stained dictionaries, this was out of the
question, as I represented.
'Then go back to the shop and change it,' said he; 'I won't have that
thing!'
'Tell me what you would like instead, and I will,' I stipulated, not
unreasonably.
He laughed; his little scheme was working so admirably. 'That's not the
bargain,' he said; 'you're bound to get me something I like. I'm not
obliged to tell you what it is.'

But even I was driven to protest against such flagrant unfairness. 'I didn't
know you meant that,' I said, 'or I'm sure I shouldn't have gone. I went
to oblige _you_, Ormsby.'
'No, you didn't,' he said, 'you went because I told you. And you'll go
again.'
'Not unless you tell me what I'm to get,' I said.
'I tell you what I believe,' he said; 'you never spent the whole shilling at
all on that; you bought something for yourself with the rest, you young
swindler! No wonder you won't go back to the shop.'
This was, of course, a mere taunt flung out by his inventive fancy; but as
he persisted in it, and threatened exposure and a variety of
consequences, I became alarmed, for I had little doubt that, innocent as I
was, I could be made very uncomfortable by accusations which would find
willing hearers.
He stood there enjoying my perplexity and idly twisting a piece of string
round and round his fingers. At length he said, 'Well, I don't want to be
hard on you. You may go and change this for me even now, if you like. I'll
give you three minutes to think it over, and you can come down into the
playground when I sing out, and tell me what you mean to do. And you
had better be sharp in coming, too, or it will be the worse for you.'
He took his cap, and presently I heard him going down the steps to the
playground. I would have given worlds to go and join the rest at tea, but I
did not dare, and remained in the schoolroom, which was dim just then,
for the gas was lowered; and while I stood there by the fireplace,
trembling in the cold air which stole in through the door Ormsby had left
open, Marjory came in by the other one, and was going straight to her
father's desk, when she saw me.
Her first impulse seemed to be to take no notice, but something in my
face or attitude made her alter her mind and come straight to me, holding
out her hand.
'Cameron,' she said, 'shall we be friends again?'
'Yes, Marjory,' I said; I could not have said any more just then.

'You look so miserable, I couldn't bear it any longer,' she said, 'so I _had_
to make it up. You know, I was only pretending crossness, Cameron, all
the time, because I really thought it was best. But it doesn't seem to have
done you much good, and I did promise to take care of you. What is it?
Ormsby again?'
'Yes,' I said, and told her the story of the commission.
'Oh, you stupid boy!' she cried, 'couldn't you see he only wanted to pick a
quarrel? And if you change it now, he'll make you change it again, and
the next time, and the next after that--I know he will!'
Here Ormsby's voice shouted from below, 'Now then, you, Cameron,
time's up!'
'What is he doing down there?' asked Marjory, and her indignation rose
higher when she heard.
'Now, Cameron, be brave; go down and tell him once for all he may just
keep what he has, and be thankful. Whatever it is, it's good enough for
_him_, I'm sure!'
But I still hung back. 'It's no use, Marjory, he'll tell everyone I cheated
him--he says he will!'
'That he shall not!' she cried; 'I won't have it, I'll go myself, and tell him
what I think of him, and make him stop treating you like this.'
Some faint glimmer of manliness made me ashamed to allow her thus to
fight my battles. 'No, Marjory, not you!' I said; 'I will go: I'll say what you
want me to say!'
But it was too late. I saw her for just a second at the door, my impetuous,
generous little Marjory, as she flung back her pretty hair in a certain
spirited way she had, and nodded to me encouragingly.
And then--I can hardly think of it calmly even now--there came a sharp
scream, and the sound of a fall, and, after that, silence.

Sick with fear, I rushed to the head of the steps, and looked down into
the brown gloom.
'Keep where you are for a minute!' I heard Ormsby cry out. 'It's all right-she's not hurt; now you can come down.'
I was down in another instant, at the foot of the stairs, where, in a patch
of faint light that fell from the door above, lay Marjory, with Ormsby
bending over her insensible form.
'She's dead!' I cried in my terror, as I saw her white face.
'I tell you she's all right,' said he, impatiently; 'there's nothing to make a
fuss about. She slipped coming down and cut her forehead--that's all.'
'Marjory, speak to me--don't look like that; tell me you're not much hurt!'
I implored her; but she only moaned a little, and her eyes remained fast
shut.
'It's no use worrying her now, you know,' said Ormsby, more gently. 'Just
help me to get her round to the kitchen door, and tell somebody.'
We carried her there between us, and, amidst a scene of terrible
confusion and distress, Marjory, still insensible, was carried into the
library, and a man sent off in hot haste for the surgeon.
A little later Ormsby and I were sent for to the study, where Dr. Dering,
whose face was white and drawn as I had never seen it before,
questioned us closely as to our knowledge of the accident.
Ormsby could only say that he was out in the playground, when he saw
somebody descending the steps, and heard a fall, after which he ran up
and found Marjory.
'I sent her into the schoolroom to bring my paper-knife,' said the Doctor;
'if I had but gone myself--! But why should she have gone outside on a
frosty night like this?'
'Oh, Dr. Dering!' I broke out, 'I'm afraid--I'm afraid she went for me!'

I saw Ormsby's face as I spoke, and there was a look upon it which made
me pity him.
'And you sent my poor child out on your errand, Cameron! Could you not
have done it yourself?'
'I wish I had!' I exclaimed; 'oh, I wish I had! I tried to stop her, and then-and then it was too late. Please tell me, sir, is she badly hurt?'
'How can I tell?' he said harshly; 'there, I can't speak of this just yet: go,
both of you.'
There was little work done at evening preparation that night; the whole
school was buzzing with curiosity and speculation, as we heard doors
opening and shutting around, and the wheels of the doctor's gig as it
rolled up the chestnut avenue.
I sat with my hands shielding my eyes and ears, engaged to all
appearance with the books before me, while my restless thoughts were
employed in making earnest resolutions for the future.
At last I saw my cowardice in its true light, and felt impatient to tell
Marjory that I did so, to prove to her that I had really reformed; but when
would an opportunity come? I might not see her again for days, perhaps
not at all till after the holidays; but I would not let myself dwell upon such
a contingency as that, and, to banish it, tried to picture what Marjory
would say, and how she would look, when I was allowed to see her again.
After evening prayers, read by one of the assistant-masters, for the
Doctor did not appear again, we were enjoined to go up to our bedrooms
with as little noise as possible, and we had been in bed some time before
Sutcliffe, the old butler, came up as usual to put out the lights.
On this occasion he was assailed by a fire of eager whispers from every
door: 'Sutcliffe, hi! old Sutty, how is she?' but he did not seem to hear,
until a cry louder than the rest brought him to our room.
'For God's sake, gentlemen, don't!' he said, in a hoarse whisper, as he
turned out the light; 'they'll hear you downstairs.'
'But how is she? do you know--better?'

'Ay,' he said, 'she's better. She'll be over her trouble soon, will Miss
Marjory!'
A low murmur of delight ran round the room, which the butler tried to
check in vain.
'Don't!' he said again, 'wait--wait till morning.... Go to sleep quiet now,
and I'll come up first thing and tell you.'
He had no sooner turned his back than the general relief broke out
irrepressibly; Ormsby being especially demonstrative. 'Didn't I tell you
fellows so?' he said triumphantly; 'as if it was likely a plucky girl like
Marjory would mind a little cut like that. She'll be all right in the morning,
you see!'
But this confidence jarred upon me, who could not pretend to share it,
until I was unable to restrain the torturing anxiety I felt.
'You're wrong--all of you!' I cried, 'I'm sure she's not better. Didn't you
hear how Sutcliffe said it? She's _worse_--she may even be dying!'
I met with the usual treatment of a prophet of evil. 'You young muff,' I
was told on all sides, 'who asked your opinion? Who are you, to know
better than anyone else?'
Ormsby attacked me hotly for trying to excite a groundless alarm, and I
was recommended to hold my tongue and go to sleep.
I said no more, but I could not sleep; the others dropped off one by one,
Ormsby being the last; but I lay awake listening and thinking, until the
dread and suspense grew past bearing. I _must_ know the truth. I would
go down and find the Doctor, and beg him to tell me; he might be angry
and punish me--but that would be nothing in comparison with the relief of
knowing my fear was unfounded.
Stealthily I slipped out of bed, stole through the dim room to the door,
and down the old staircase, which creaked under my bare feet. The dog in
the yard howled as I passed the big window, through which the stars
were sparkling frostily in the keen blue sky. Outside the room in which

Marjory lay, I listened, but could hear nothing. At least she was sleeping,
then, and, relieved already, I went on down to the hall.
The big clock on a table there was ticking solemnly, like a slow footfall;
the lamp was alight, so the Doctor must be still up. With a heart that beat
loudly I went to his study door and lifted my hand to knock, when from
within rose a sound at which the current of my blood stopped and ran
backwards--the terrible, heartbroken grief of a grown man.
Boy as I was, I felt that an agony like that was sacred; besides, I knew
the worst then.
I dragged myself upstairs again, cold to the bones, with a brain that was
frozen too. My one desire was to reach my bed, cover my face, and let
the tears flow; though, when I did regain it, no tears and no thoughts
came. I lay there and shivered for some time, with a stony, stunned
sensation, and then I slept--as if Marjory were well.
The next morning the bell under the cupola did not clang, and Sutcliffe
came up with the direction that we were to go down very quietly, and not
to draw up the window-blinds; and then we all knew what had happened
during the night.
There was a very genuine grief, though none knew Marjory as I had
known her; the more emotional wept, the older ones indulged in little
semi-pious conventional comments, oddly foreign to their usual tone; all-even the most thoughtless--felt the same hush and awe overtake them.
I could not cry; I felt nothing, except a dull rage at my own insensibility.
Marjory was dead--and I had no tears.
Morning school was a mere pretence that day; we dreaded, for almost the
first time, to see the Doctor's face, but he did not show himself, and the
arrangements necessary for the breaking-up of the school were made by
the matron.
Some, including Ormsby and myself, could not be taken in for some days,
during which we had to remain at the school: days of shadow and
monotony, with occasional ghastly outbreaks of the high spirits which
nothing could repress, even in that house of mourning.

But the time passed at last, until it was the evening of the day on which
Marjory had been left to her last sleep.
The poor father and mother had been unable to stay in the house now
that it no longer covered even what had been their child; and the only
two, besides the matron and a couple of servants who still remained
there, were Ormsby and I, who were both to leave on the following
morning.
I would rather have been alone just then with anyone but Ormsby,
though he had never since that fatal night taken the slightest notice of
me; he looked worn and haggard to a degree that made me sure he must
have cared more for Marjory than I could have imagined, and yet he
would break at times into a feverish gaiety which surprised and repelled
me.
He was in one of these latter moods that evening, as we sat, as far apart
as possible, in the empty, firelit schoolroom.
'Now, Cameron,' he said, as he came up to me and struck me boisterously
on the shoulder, 'wake up, man! I've been in the blues long enough. We
can't go on moping always, on the night before the holidays, too! Do
something to make yourself sociable--talk, can't you?'
'No, I can't,' I said; and, breaking from him, went to one of the windows
and looked vacantly out into blackness, which reflected the long room,
with its dingy greenish maps, and the desks and forms glistening in the
fire-beams.
The ice-bound state in which I had been so long was slowly passing away,
now that the scene by the little grave that raw, cheerless morning had
brought home remorselessly the truth that Marjory was indeed gone--lost
to me for ever.
I could see now what she had been to me; how she had made my great
loneliness endurable; how, with her innocent, fearless nature, she had
tried to rouse me from spiritless and unmanly dejection. And I could
never hope to please her now by proving that I had learnt the lesson; she
had gone from me to some world infinitely removed, in which I was
forgotten, and my pitiful trials and struggles could be nothing to her any
more!

I was once more alone, and this second bereavement revived in all its
crushing desolation the first bitter loss which it so closely followed.
So, as I stood there at the window, my unnatural calm could hold out no
longer; the long-frozen tears thawed, and I could weep for the first time
since Marjory died.
But I was not allowed to sorrow undisturbed; I felt a rough grasp on my
arm, as Ormsby asked me angrily, 'What's the matter now?'
'Oh, Marjory, come to me!' I could only cry; 'I can't bear it! I can't! I
can't!'
'Stop that, do you hear?' he said savagely, 'I won't have it! Who are you
to cry about her, when--but for _you_----'
He got no farther; the bitter truth in such a taunt, coming from him,
stung me to ungovernable rage. I turned and struck him full in the mouth,
which I cut open with my clenched hand.
His eyes became all pupil. 'You shall pay me for that!' he said through his
teeth; and, forcing me against a desk, he caught up a large T-square
which lay near; he was far the stronger, and I felt myself powerless in his
grasp. Passion and pain had made him beside himself for the moment,
and he did not know how formidable a weapon the heavily-weighted
instrument might become in his hand.
I shut my eyes: I think I rather hoped he would kill me, and then perhaps
I might go where Marjory was. I did not cry for help, and it would have
been useless if I had done so, for the schoolroom was a long way from
the kitchen and offices of that rambling old house.
But before the expected blow was dealt I felt his grasp relax, and heard
the instrument fall with a sudden clatter on the floor. 'Look,' he
whispered, in a voice I did not recognise, '_look there_!'
And when I opened my eyes, I saw Marjory standing between us!
She looked just as I had always seen her: I suppose that even the afterlife could not make Marjory look purer, or more lovely than she was on

earth. My first feeling was a wild conviction that it had all been some
strange mistake--that Marjory was not dead.
'Marjory, Marjory!' I cried in my joy, 'is it really you? You have come
back, after all, and it is not true!'
She looked at us both without speaking for a moment; her dear brown
eyes had lost their old childish sparkle, and were calm and serious as if
with a deeper knowledge.
Ormsby had cowered back to the opposite wall, covering his face. 'Go
away!' he gasped. 'Cameron--_you_ ask her to go. She--she liked you....
I never meant it. Tell her I never meant to do it!'
I could not understand such terror at the sight of Marjory, even if she had
been what he thought her; but there was a reason in his case.
'You were going to hurt Cameron,' said Marjory, at length, and her voice
sounded sad and grave and far-away.
'I don't care, Marjory,' I cried, 'not now you are here!'
She motioned me back: 'You must not come nearer,' she said. 'I cannot
stay long, and I must speak to Ormsby. Ormsby, have you told anyone?'
'No,' he said, shaking all over, 'it could do no good.... I thought I needn't.'
'Tell _him_,' said Marjory.
'Must I? Oh, no, no!' he groaned, 'don't make me do that!'
'You must,' she answered, and he turned to me with a sullen fear.
'It was like this,' he began; 'that night, when I was waiting for you down
there--I had some string, and it struck me, all in a moment, that it would
be fun to trip you up. I didn't mean to hurt you--only frighten you. I
fastened the string across a little way from the bottom. And then'--he had
to moisten his lips before he could go on--'then _she_ came down, and I
tried to catch her--and couldn't--no, I couldn't!'
'Is that all?' asked Marjory, as he stopped short.

'I cut the string and hid it before you came. Now you know, and you may
tell if you like!'
'Cameron, you will never tell, will you--as long as he lives?' said Marjory.
'You must promise.'
I was horrified by what I had heard; but her eyes were upon me, and I
promised.
'And you, Ormsby, promise me to be kinder to him after this.'
He could not speak; but he made a sign of assent.
'And now,' said Marjory, 'shake hands with him and forgive him.'
But I revolted: 'No, Marjory, I can't; not now--when I know this!'
'Cameron, dear,' she said, 'you won't let me go away sorry, will you? and
I must go so soon. For my sake, when I wish it so!'
I went to Ormsby, and took his cold, passive hand. 'I do forgive him,
Marjory,' I said.
She smiled brightly at us both. 'And you won't forget, either of you?' she
said. 'And, Douglas, you will be brave, and take your own part now.
Good-bye, good-bye.'
I tried to reach her. 'Don't leave me; take me with you, Marjory--dear,
dear Marjory, don't go!' But there was only firelit space where she had
stood, though the sound of her pleading, pathetic voice was still in the air.
Ormsby remained for a few minutes leaning against a desk, with his face
buried in his arms, and I heard him struggling with his sobs. At last he
rose, and left the room without a word.
But I stayed there where I had last seen Marjory, till the fire died down,
and the hour was late, for I was glad to be alone with the new and
solemn joy that had come to me. For she had not forgotten me where she
was; I had been allowed to see her once more, and it might even be that

I should see her again. And I resolved then that when she came she
should find me more worthy of her.
*****
From that night my character seemed to enter upon a new phase, and
when I returned to school it was to begin my second term under better
auspices.
My cousins had welcomed me cordially among them, and as I mastered
the lesson of give and take, of respecting one's self in respecting others,
which I needed to learn, my early difficulties vanished with the weakness
that had produced them.
By Ormsby I was never again molested; in word and deed, he was true to
the promise exacted from him during that last strange scene. At first, he
avoided me as being too painfully connected with the past; but by
degrees, as he recognised that his secret was safe in my keeping, we
grew to understand one another better, although it would be too much to
say that we ever became intimate.
After he went to Sandhurst I lost sight of him, and only a few months
since the news of his death in the Soudan, where he fell gallantly, made
me sorrowfully aware that we should never meet again.
I had a lingering fancy that Marjory might appear to me once more, but I
have long since given up all hope of that in this life, and for what may
come after I am content to wait.
But the charge my child-friend had undertaken was completed on the
night she was allowed to return to earth and determine the crisis of two
lives; there is nothing now to call the bright and gracious little spirit back,
for her influence will remain always.

