Starlight Man
Charles King

We were crouching round the bivouac fire, for the night was chill, and we
were yet high up along the summit of the great range. We had been
scouting through the mountains for ten days, steadily working southward,
and, though far from our own station, our supplies were abundant, and it
was our leader's purpose to make a clean sweep of the line from old
Sandy to the Salado, and fully settle the question as to whether the
renegade Apaches had betaken themselves, as was possible, to the
heights of the Matitzal, or had made a break for their old haunts in the
Tonto Basin or along the foot-hills of the Black Mesa to the east. Strong
scouting-parties had gone thitherward, too, for "the Chief" was bound to
bring these Tontos to terms; but our orders were explicit: "Thoroughly
scout the east face of the Matitzal." We had capital Indian allies with us.
Their eyes were keen, their legs tireless, and there had been bad blood
between them and the tribe now broken away from the reservation. They
asked nothing better than a chance to shoot and kill them; so we could
feel well assured that if "Tonto sign" appeared anywhere along our path it
would instantly be reported. But now we were south of the confluence of
Tonto Creek and the Wild Rye, and our scouts declared that beyond that
point was the territory of the White Mountain Apaches, where we would
not be likely to find the renegades.
East of us, as we lay there in the sheltered nook whence the glare of our
fire could not be seen, lay the deep valley of the Tonto brawling along its
rocky bed on the way to join the Salado, a few short marches farther
south. Beyond it, though we could not see them now, the peaks and
"buttes" of the Sierra Ancha rolled up as massive foot-hills to the
Mogollon. All through there our scouting-parties had hitherto been able to
find Indians whenever they really wanted to. There were some officers
who couldn't find the Creek itself if they thought Apaches lurked along its
bank, and of such, some of us thought, was our leader.
In the dim twilight only a while before I had heard our chief packer
exchanging confidences with one of the sergeants,--

"I tell you, Harry, if the old man were trying to steer clear of all possibility
of finding these Tontos, he couldn't have followed a better track than ours
has been. And he made it, too; did you notice? Every time the scouts
tried to work out to the left he would herd them all back--up-hill."
"We never did think the lieutenant had any too much sand," answered the
sergeant, grimly; "but any man with half an eye can see that orders to
thoroughly scout the east face of a range does not mean keep on top of it
as we've been doing. Why, in two more marches we'll be beyond their
stamping-ground entirely, and then it's only a slide down the west face to
bring us to those ranches in the Sandy Valley. Ever seen them?"
"No. I've never been this far down; but what do you want to bet that
_that's_ what the lieutenant is aiming at? He wants to get a look at that
pretty girl all the fellows at Fort Phoenix are talking about."
"Dam'd old gray-haired rip! It would be just like him. With a wife and kids
up at Sandy too."
There were officers in the party, junior in years of life and years of service
to the gray-headed subaltern whom some odd fate had assigned to the
command of this detachment, nearly two complete "troops" of cavalry
with a pack-train of sturdy little mules to match. We all knew that, as
organized, one of our favorite captains had been assigned the command,
and that between "the Chief," as we called our general, and him a perfect
understanding existed as to just how thorough and searching this scout
should be. The general himself came down to Sandy to superintend the
start of the various commands, and rode away after a long interview with
our good old colonel, and after seeing the two parties destined for the
Black Mesa and the Tonto Basin well on their way. We were to move at
nightfall the following day, and within an hour of the time of starting a
courier rode in from Prescott with despatches (it was before our military
telegraph line was built), and the commander of the division--the superior
of our Arizona chief--ordered Captain Tanner to repair at once to San
Francisco as witness before an important court-martial. A groan went up
from more than one of us when we heard the news, for it meant nothing
less than that the command of the most important expedition of all would

now devolve upon the senior first lieutenant, Gleason; and so much did it
worry Mr. Blake, his junior by several files, that he went at once to
Colonel Pelham, and begged to be relieved from duty with that column
and ordered to overtake one of the others. The colonel, of course, would
listen to nothing of the kind, and to Gleason's immense and evident
gratification we were marched forth under his command. There had been
no friction, however. Despite his gray beard, Gleason was not an old man,
and he really strove to be courteous and conciliatory to his officers,--he
was always considerate towards his men; but by the time we had been
out ten days, having accomplished nothing, most of us were thoroughly
disgusted. Some few ventured to remonstrate. Angry words passed
between the commander and Mr. Blake, and on the night on which our
story begins there was throughout the command a feeling that we were
simply being trifled with.
The chat between our chief packer and Sergeant Merrick ceased instantly
as I came forward and passed them on the way to look over the herd
guard of the little battalion, but it set me to thinking. This was not the
first that the officers of the Sandy garrison had heard of those two new
"ranches" established within the year down in the hot but fertile valley,
and not more than four hours' easy gallop from Fort Phoenix, where a
couple of troops of "Ours" were stationed. The people who had so
confidently planted themselves there were evidently well to do, and they
brought with them a good-sized retinue of ranch- and herdsmen,--mainly
Mexicans,--plenty of "stock," and a complete "camp outfit," which served
them well until they could raise the adobe walls and finish their
homesteads. Curiosity led occasional parties of officers or enlisted men to
spend a day in saddle and thus to visit these enterprising neighbors. Such
parties were always civilly received, invited to dismount, and soon to take
a bite of luncheon with the proprietors, while their horses were promptly
led away, unsaddled, rubbed down, and at the proper time fed and
watered. The officers, of course, had introduced themselves and proffered
the hospitality and assistance of the fort. The proprietors had expressed
all proper appreciation, and declared that if anything should happen to be
needed they would be sure to call; but they were too busy, they
explained, to make social visits. They were hard at work, as the
gentlemen could see, getting up their houses and their corrals, for, as one
of them expressed it, "We've come to stay." There were three of these

pioneers; two of them, brothers evidently, gave the name of Crocker. The
third, a tall, swarthy, all-over-frontiersman, was introduced by the others
as Mr. Burnham. Subsequent investigations led to the fact that Burnham
was first cousin to the Crockers. "Been long in Arizona?" had been asked,
and the elder Crocker promptly replied, "No, only a year,--mostly
prospecting."
The Crockers were building down towards the stream; but Burnham, from
some freak which he did not explain, had driven his stakes and was slowly
getting up his walls half a mile south of the other homestead, and high up
on a spur of foot-hill that stood at least three hundred feet above the
general level of the valley. From his "coigne of vantage" the whitewashed
walls and the bright colors of the flag of the fort could be dimly made
out,--twenty odd miles down stream.
"Every now and then," said Captain Wayne, who happened up our way on
a general court, "a bull-train--a small one--went past the fort on its way
up to the ranches, carrying lumber and all manner of supplies, but they
never stopped and camped near the post either going or coming, as other
trains were sure to do. They never seemed to want anything, even at the
sutler's store, though the Lord knows there wasn't much there they
_could_ want except tanglefoot and tobacco. The bull-train made perhaps
six trips in as many months, and by that time the glasses at the fort could
make out that Burnham's place was all finished, but never once had either
of the three proprietors put in an appearance, as invited, which was
considered not only extraordinary but unneighborly, and everybody quit
riding out there."
"But the funniest thing," said Wayne, "happened one night when I was
officer of the day. The road up-stream ran within a hundred yards of the
post of the sentry on No. 3, which post was back of the officer's quarters,
and a quarter of a mile above the stables, corrals, etc. I was making the
rounds about one o'clock in the morning. The night was bright and clear,
though the moon was low, and I came upon Dexter, one of the sharpest
men in my troop, as the sentry on No. 3. After I had given him the
countersign and was about going on,--for there was no use in asking
_him_ if he knew his orders,--he stopped me to ask if I had authorized
the stable-sergeant to let out one of the ambulances within the hour. Of

course I was amazed and said no. 'Well,' said he, 'not ten minutes ago a
four-mule ambulance drove up the road yonder going full tilt, and I
thought something was wrong, but it was far beyond my challenge limit.'
You can understand that I went to the stables on the jump, ready to scalp
the sentry there, the sergeant of the guard, and everybody else. I sailed
into the sentry first and he was utterly astonished; he swore that every
horse, mule, and wagon was in its proper place. I routed out the old
stable-sergeant and we went through everything with his lantern. There
wasn't a spoke or a hoof missing. Then I went back to Dexter and asked
him what he'd been drinking, and he seemed much hurt. I told him every
wheel at the fort was in its proper rut and that nothing could have gone
out. Neither could there have been a four-mule ambulance from
elsewhere. There wasn't a civilized corral within fifty miles except those
new ranches up the valley, and _they_ had no such rig. All the same,
Dexter stuck to his story, and it ended in our getting a lantern and going
down to the road. By Gad! he was right. There, in the moist, yielding
sand, were the fresh tracks of a four-mule team and a Concord wagon or
something of the same sort. So much for _that_ night!
"Next evening as a lot of us were sitting out on the major's piazza, and
young Briggs of the infantry was holding forth on the constellations,--you
know he's a good deal of an astronomer,--Mrs. Powell suddenly turned to
him with 'But you haven't told us the name of that bright planet low down
there in the northern sky,' and we all turned and looked where she
pointed. Briggs looked too. It was only a little lower than some stars of
the second and third magnitude that he had been telling about only five
minutes before, only it shone with a redder or yellower glare,--orange I
suppose was the real color,--and was clear and strong as the light of
Jupiter.
"'That?' says Briggs. 'Why, that must be----Well, I own up. I declare I
never knew there was so big a star in that part of the firmament!'
"'Don't worry about it, Briggs, old boy,' drawled the major, who had been
squinting at it through a powerful glass he owns. 'That's terra firmament.
That planet's at the new ranch up on the spur of the Matitzal.'

"But that wasn't all. Two days after, Baker came in from a scout. He had
been over across the range and had stopped at Burnham's on his way
down. He didn't see Burnham; he wasn't invited in, but he was full of his
subject. 'By _Jove!_ fellows. Have any of you been to the ranches lately?
No? Well, then, I want to get some of the ladies to go up there and call.
In all my life I never saw so pretty a girl as was sitting there on the
piazza when I rode around the corner of the house. _Pretty!_ She's
lovely. Not Mexican. No, indeed! A real American girl,--a young lady, by
Gad!'" That, then, explained the new light.
"And did that give the ranch the name by which it is known to you?" we
asked Wayne.
"Yes. The ladies called it 'Starlight Ranch' from that night on. But not one
of them has seen the girl. Mrs. Frazer and Mrs. Jennings actually took the
long drive and asked for the ladies, and were civilly told that there were
none at home. It was a Chinese servant who received them. They
inquired for Mr. Burnham and he was away too. They asked how many
ladies there were, and the Chinaman shook his head--'No sabe.' 'Had Mr.
Burnham's wife and daughter come?' 'No sabe.' 'Were Mr. Burnham and
the ladies over at the other ranch?' 'No sabe,' still affably grinning, and
evidently personally pleased to see the strange ladies; but that Chinaman
was no fool; he had his instructions and was carrying them out; and Mrs.
Frazer, whose eyes are very keen, was confident that she saw the
curtains in an upper window gathered just so as to admit a pair of eyes to
peep down at the fort wagon with its fair occupants. But the face of which
she caught a glimpse was not that of a young woman. They gave the
Chinaman their cards, which he curiously inspected and was evidently at
a loss what to do with, and after telling him to give them to the ladies
when they came home they drove over to the Crocker Ranch. Here only
Mexicans were visible about the premises, and, though Mrs. Frazer's
Spanish was equal to the task of asking them for water for herself and
friend, she could not get an intelligible reply from the swarthy Ganymede
who brought them the brimming glasses as to the ladies--_Las senoras_-at the other ranch. They asked for the Crockers, and the Mexican only
vaguely pointed up the valley. It was in defeat and humiliation that the
ladies with their escort, Mr. Baker, returned to the fort, but Baker rode up
again and took a comrade with him, and they both saw the girl with the

lovely face and form this time, and had almost accosted her when a
sharp, stern voice called her within. A fortnight more and a dozen men,
officers or soldiers, had rounded that ranch and had seen two women,-one middle-aged, the other a girl of about eighteen who was fair and
bewitchingly pretty. Baker had bowed to her and she had smiled sweetly
on him, even while being drawn within doors. One or two men had
cornered Burnham and began to ask questions. 'Gentlemen,' said he, 'I'm
a poor hand at talk. I've no education. I've lived on the frontier all my life.
I mean no offence, but I cannot answer your questions and I cannot ask
you into my house. For explanation, I refer you to Mr. Crocker.' Then
Baker and a chum of his rode over and called on the elder Crocker, and
asked for the explanation. That only added to the strangeness of the
thing.
"'It is true, gentlemen, that Mr. Burnham's wife and child are now with
him; but, partially because of her, his wife's, infirm health, and partially
because of a most distressing and unfortunate experience in his past, our
kinsman begs that no one will attempt to call at the ranch. He appreciates
all the courtesy the gentlemen and ladies at the fort would show, and
have shown, but he feels compelled to decline all intercourse. We are
beholden, in a measure, to Mr. Burnham, and have to be guided by his
wishes. We are young men compared to him, and it was through him that
we came to seek our fortune here, but he is virtually the head of both
establishments.' Well. There was nothing more to be said, and the boys
came away. One thing more transpired. Burnham gave it out that he had
lived in Texas before the war, and had fought all the way through in the
Confederate service. He thought the officers ought to know this. It was
the major himself to whom he told it, and when the major replied that he
considered the war over and that that made no difference, Burnham, with
a clouded face replied, 'Well, mebbe it don't--to you.' Whereupon the
major fired up and told him that if he chose to be an unreconstructed reb,
when Union officers and gentlemen were only striving to be civil to him,
he might 'go ahead and be d--d,' and came away in high dudgeon." And
so matters stood up to the last we had heard from Fort Phoenix, except
for one letter which Mrs. Frazer wrote to Mrs. Turner at Sandy, perhaps
purely out of feminine mischief, because a year or so previous Baker, as a
junior second lieutenant, was doing the devoted to Mrs. Turner, a species
of mildly amatory apprenticeship which most of the young officers

seemed impelled to serve on first joining. "We are having such a romance
here at Phoenix. You have doubtless heard of the beautiful girl at
'Starlight Ranch,' as we call the Burnham place, up the valley. Everybody
who called has been rebuffed; but, after catching a few glimpses of her,
Mr. Baker became completely infatuated and rode up that way three or
four times a week. Of late he has ceased going in the daytime, but it is
known that he rides out towards dusk and gets back long after midnight,
sometimes not till morning. Of course it takes four hours, nearly, to come
from there full-speed, but though Major Tracy will admit nothing, it must
be that Mr. Baker has his permission to be away at night. We all believe
that it is another case of love laughing at locksmiths and that in some
way they contrive to meet. One thing is certain,--Mr. Baker is desperately
in love and will permit no trifling with him on the subject." Ordinarily, I
suppose, such a letter would have been gall and wormwood to Mrs.
Turner, but as young Hunter, a new appointment, was now a devotee,
and as it was a piece of romantic news which interested all Camp Sandy,
she read the letter to one lady after another, and so it became public
property. Old Catnip, as we called the colonel, was disposed to be a little
worried on the subject. Baker was a youngster in whom he had some
interest as being a distant connection of his wife's, but Mrs. Pelham had
not come to Arizona with us, and the good old fellow was living _en
garcon_ with the Mess, where, of course, the matter was discussed in all
its bearings.
All these things recurred to me as I pottered around through the herds
examining side-lines, etc., and looking up the guards. Ordinarily our
scouting parties were so small that we had no such thing as an officer-ofthe-day,--nor had we now when Gleason could have been excused for
ordering one, but he evidently desired to do nothing that might annoy his
officers. He _might_ want them to stand by him when it came to
reporting the route and result of the scout. All the same, he expected that
the troop officers would give personal supervision to their command, and
especially to look after their "herds," and it was this duty that took me
away from the group chatting about the bivouac fire preparatory to
"turning in" for the night.
When I got back, a tall, gray-haired trooper was "standing attention" in
front of the commanding officer, and had evidently just made some

report, for Mr. Gleason nodded his head appreciatively and then said,
kindly,-"You did perfectly right, corporal. Instruct your men to keep a lookout for
it, and if seen again to-night to call me at once. I'll bring my field-glass
and we'll see what it is."
The trooper raised his left hand to the "carried" carbine in salute and
turned away. When he was out of earshot, Gleason spoke to the silent
group,-"Now, there's a case in point. If I had command of a troop and could get
old Potts into it I could make something of him, and I know it."
Gleason had consummate faith in his "system" with the rank and file, and
no respect for that of any of the captains. Nobody said anything. Blake
hated him and puffed unconcernedly at his pipe, with a display of absolute
indifference to his superior's views that the latter did not fail to note. The
others knew what a trial "old Potts" had been to his troop commander,
and did not believe that Gleason could "reform" him at will. The silence
was embarrassing, so I inquired,-"What had he to report?"
"Oh, nothing of any consequence. He and one of the sentries saw what
they took to be an Indian signal-fire up Tonto Creek. It soon smouldered
away,--but I always make it a point to show respect to these old
soldiers."
"You show d--d little respect for their reports all the same," said Blake,
suddenly shooting up on a pair of legs that looked like stilts. "An Indian
signal-fire is a matter of a heap of consequence in my opinion;" and he
wrathfully stalked away.
For some reason Gleason saw fit to take no notice of this piece of
insubordination. Placidly he resumed his chat,--

"Now, you gentlemen seem skeptical about Potts. Do any of you know his
history?"
"Well, I know he's about the oldest soldier in the regiment; that he served
in the First Dragoons when they were in Arizona twenty years ago, and
that he gets drunk as a boiled owl every pay-day," was an immediate
answer.
"Very good as far as it goes," replied Gleason, with a superior smile; "but
I'll just tell you a chapter in his life he never speaks of and I never
dreamed of until the last time I was in San Francisco. There I met old
General Starr at the 'Occidental,' and almost the first thing he did was to
inquire for Potts, and then he told me about him. He was one of the finest
sergeants in Starr's troop in '53,--a dashing, handsome fellow,--and while
in at Fort Leavenworth he had fallen in love with, won, and married as
pretty a young girl as ever came into the regiment. She came out to New
Mexico with the detachment with which he served, and was the belle of all
the '_bailes_' given either by the 'greasers' or the enlisted men. He was
proud of her as he could be, and old Starr swore that the few ladies of the
regiment who were with them at old Fort Fillmore or Stanton were really
jealous of her. Even some of the young officers got to saying sweet things
to her, and Potts came to the captain about it, and he had it stopped; but
the girl's head was turned. There was a handsome young fellow in the
sutler's store who kept making her presents on the sly, and when at last
Potts found it out he nearly hammered the life out of him. Then came that
campaign against the Jicarilla Apaches, and Potts had to go with his troop
and leave her at the cantonment, where, to be sure, there were ladies
and plenty of people to look after her; and in the fight at Cieneguilla poor
Potts was badly wounded, and it was some months before they got back;
and meantime the sutler fellow had got in his work, and when the
command finally came in with its wounded they had skipped, no one knew
where. If Potts hadn't been taken down with brain fever on top of his
wound he would have followed their trail, desertion or no desertion, but
he was a broken man when he got out of hospital. The last thing old Starr
said to me was, 'Now, Gleason, I want you to be kind to my old sergeant;
he served all through the war, and I've never forgiven them in the First
for going back on him and refusing to re-enlist him; but the captains, one
and all, said it was no use; he had sunk lower and lower; was perfectly

unreliable; spent nine-tenths of his time in the guard-house and all his
money in whiskey; and one after another they refused to take him.'"
"How'd we happen to get him, then?" queried one of our party.
"He showed up at San Francisco, neat as a new pin; exhibited several fine
discharges, but said nothing of the last two, and was taken into the
regiment as we were going through. Of course, its pretty much as they
said in the First when we're in garrison, but, once out scouting, days away
from a drop of 'tanglefoot,' and he does first rate. That's how he got his
corporal's chevrons."
"He'll lose 'em again before we're back at Sandy forty-eight hours,"
growled Blake, strolling up to the party again.
But he did not. Prophecies failed this time, and old Potts wore those
chevrons to the last.
He was a good prophet and a keen judge of human nature as exemplified
in Gleason, who said that "the old man" was planning for a visit to the
new ranches above Fort Phoenix. A day or two farther we plodded along
down the range, our Indian scouts looking reproachfully--even sullenly--at
the commander at every halt, and then came the order to turn back. Two
marches more, and the little command went into bivouac close under the
eaves of Fort Phoenix and we were exchanging jovial greetings with our
brother officers at the post. Turning over the command to Lieutenant
Blake, Mr. Gleason went up into the garrison with his own particular packmule; billeted himself on the infantry commanding officer--the major-and in a short time appeared freshly-shaved and in the neatest possible
undress uniform, ready to call upon the few ladies at the post, and of
course to make frequent reference to "my battalion," or "my command,"
down beyond the dusty, dismal corrals. The rest of us, having come out
for business, had no uniforms, nothing but the rough field, scouting rig we
wore on such duty, and every man's chin was bristling with a two-weeks'old beard.
"I'm going to report Gleason for this thing," swore Blake; "you see if I
don't, the moment we get back."

The rest of us were "hopping mad," too, but held our tongues so long as
we were around Phoenix. We did not want them there to believe there
was dissension and almost mutiny impending. Some of us got permission
from Blake to go up to the post with its hospitable officers, and I was one
who strolled up to "the store" after dark. There we found the major, and
Captain Frazer, and Captain Jennings, and most of the youngsters, but
Baker was absent. Of course the talk soon drifted to and settled on
"Starlight Ranch," and by tattoo most of the garrison crowd were talking
like so many Prussians, all at top-voice and all at once. Every man
seemed to have some theory of his own with regard to the peculiar
conduct of Mr. Burnham, but no one dissented from the quiet remark of
Captain Frazer:
"As for Baker's relations with the daughter, he is simply desperately in
love and means to marry her. He tells my wife that she is educated and
far more refined than her surroundings would indicate, but that he is
refused audience by both Burnham and his wife, and it is only at extreme
risk that he is able to meet his lady-love at all. Some nights she is entirely
prevented from slipping out to see him."
Presently in came Gleason, beaming and triumphant from his round of
calls among the fair sex, and ready now for the game he loved above all
things on earth,--poker. For reasons which need not be elaborated here
no officer in our command would play with him, and an ugly rumor was
going the rounds at Sandy, just before we came away, that, in a game at
Olsen's ranch on the Aqua Fria about three weeks before, he had had his
face slapped by Lieutenant Ray of our own regiment. But Ray had gone to
his lonely post at Camp Cameron, and there was no one by whom we
could verify it except some ranchmen, who declared that Gleason had
cheated at cards, and Ray "had been a little too full," as they put it, to
detect the fraud until it seemed to flash upon him all of a sudden. A game
began, however, with three local officers as participants, so presently
Carroll and I withdrew and went back to bivouac.
"Have you seen anything of Corporal Potts?" was the first question asked
by Mr. Blake.

"Not a thing. Why? Is he missing?"
"Been missing for an hour. He was talking with some of these garrison
soldiers here just after the men had come in from the herd, and what I'm
afraid of is that he'll go up into the post and get bilin' full there. I've sent
other non-commissioned officers after him, but they cannot find him. He
hasn't even looked in at the store, so the bar-tender swears."
"The sly old rascal!" said Carroll. "He knows perfectly well how to get all
the liquor he wants without exposing himself in the least. No doubt if the
bar-tender were asked if he had not filled some flasks this evening he
would say yes, and Potts is probably stretched out comfortably in the
forage-loft of one of the stables, with a canteen of water and his flask of
bug-juice, prepared to make a night of it."
Blake moodily gazed into the embers of the bivouac-fire. Never had we
seen him so utterly unlike himself as on this burlesque of a scout, and
now that we were virtually homeward-bound, and empty-handed too, he
was completely weighed down by the consciousness of our lost
opportunities. If something could only have happened to Gleason before
the start, so that the command might have devolved on Blake, we all felt
that a very different account could have been rendered; for with all his
rattling, ranting fun around the garrison, he was a gallant and dutiful
soldier in the field. It was now after ten o'clock; most of the men, rolled in
their blankets, were sleeping on the scant turf that could be found at
intervals in the half-sandy soil below the corrals and stables. The herds of
the two troops and the pack-mules were all cropping peacefully at the hay
that had been liberally distributed among them because there was hardly
grass enough for a "burro." We were all ready to turn in, but there stood
our temporary commander, his long legs a-straddle, his hands clasped
behind him, and the flickering light of the fire betraying in his face both
profound dejection and disgust.
"I wouldn't care so much," said he at last, "but it will give Gleason a
chance to say that things always go wrong when he's away. Did you see
him up at the post?" he suddenly asked. "What was he doing, Carroll?"
"Poker," was the sententious reply.

"What?" shouted Blake. "Poker? 'I thank thee, good Tubal,--good news,-good news!'" he ranted, with almost joyous relapse into his old manner.
"'O Lady Fortune, stand you auspicious', for those fellows at Phoenix, I
mean, and may they scoop our worthy chieftain of his last ducat. See
what it means, fellows. Win or lose, he'll play all night, he'll drink much if
it go agin' him, and I pray it may. He'll be too sick, when morning comes,
to join us, and, by my faith, we'll leave his horse and orderly and march
away without him. As for Potts,--an he appear not,--we'll let him play
hide-and-seek with his would-be reformer. Hullo! What's that?"
There was a sound of alternate shout and challenge towards where the
horses were herded on the level stretch below us. The sergeant of the
guard was running rapidly thither as Carroll and I reached the corner of
the corral. Half a minute's brisk spurt brought us to the scene.
"What's the trouble, sentry?" panted the sergeant.
"One of our fellows trying to take a horse. I was down on this side of the
herd when I seen him at the other end trying to loose a side-line. It was
just light enough by the moon to let me see the figure, but I couldn't
make out who 'twas. I challenged and ran and yelled for the corporal, too,
but he got away through the horses somehow. Murphy, who's on the
other side of the herds, seen him and challenged too."
"Did he answer?"
"Not a word, sir."
"Count your horses, sergeant, and see if all are here," was ordered. Then
we hurried over to Murphy's post.
"Who was the man? Could you make him out?"
"Not plainly, sir; but I think it was one of our own command," and poor
Murphy hesitated and stammered. He hated to "give away," as he
expressed it, one of his own troop. But his questioners were inexorable.

"What man did this one most look like, so far as you could judge?"
"Well, sir, I hate to suspicion anybody, but 'twas more like Corporal Potts
he looked. Sure, if 'twas him, he must ha' been drinkin', for the corporal's
not the man to try and run off a horse when he's in his sober sinses."
The waning moon gave hardly enough light for effective search, but we
did our best. Blake came out and joined us, looking very grave when he
heard the news. Eleven o'clock came, and we gave it up. Not a sign of the
marauder could we find. Potts was still absent from the bivouac when we
got back, but Blake determined to make no further effort to find him.
Long before midnight we were all soundly sleeping, and the next thing I
knew my orderly was shaking me by the arm and announcing breakfast.
Reveille was just being sounded up at the garrison. The sun had not yet
climbed high enough to peep over the Matitzal, but it was broad daylight.
In ten minutes Carroll and I were enjoying our coffee and _frijoles_;
Blake had ridden up into the garrison. Potts was still absent; and so, as
we expected, was Mr. Gleason.
Half an hour more, and in long column of twos, and followed by our packtrain, the command was filing out along the road whereon "No. 3" had
seen the ambulance darting by in the darkness. Blake had come back
from the post with a flush of anger on his face and with lips compressed.
He did not even dismount. "Saddle up at once" was all he said until he
gave the commands to mount and march. Opposite the quarters of the
commanding officer we were riding at ease, and there he shook his
gauntleted fist at the whitewashed walls, and had recourse to his usual
safety-valve,--

"'Take heed, my lords, the welfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man,'

and may the devil fly away with him! What d'ye think he told me when I
went to hunt him up?"
There was no suitable conjecture.

"He said to march ahead, leaving his horse, Potts's, and his orderly's, also
the pack-mule: he would follow at his leisure. He had given Potts
authority to wait and go with him, but did not consider it necessary to
notify me."
"Where was he?"
"Still at the store, playing with the trader and some understrappers.
Didn't seem to be drunk, either."
And that was the last we heard of our commander until late in the
evening. We were then in bivouac on the west bank of the Sandy within
short rifle-range of the buildings of Crocker's Ranch on the other side.
There the lights burned brightly, and some of our people who had gone
across had been courteously received, despite a certain constraint and
nervousness displayed by the two brothers. At "Starlight," however,
nearly a mile away from us, all was silence and darkness. We had studied
it curiously as we marched up along the west shore, and some of the men
had asked permission to fall out and ride over there, "just to see it," but
Blake had refused. The Sandy was easily fordable on horseback
anywhere, and the Crockers, for the convenience of their ranch people,
had placed a lot of bowlders and heaps of stones in such position that
they served as a foot-path opposite their corrals. But Blake said he would
rather none of his people intruded at "Starlight," and so it happened that
we were around the fire when Gleason rode in about nine o'clock, and
with him Lieutenant Baker, also the recreant Potts.
"You may retain command, Mr. Blake," said the former, thickly. "I have
an engagement this evening."
In an instant Baker was at my side. We had not met before since he was
wearing the gray at the Point.
"For God's sake, don't let him follow me,--but _you_,--come if you
possibly can. I'll slip off into the willows up-stream as soon as I can do so
without his seeing."

I signalled Blake to join us, and presently he sauntered over our way,
Gleason meantime admonishing his camp cook that he expected to have
the very best hot supper for himself and his friend, Lieutenant Baker,
ready in twenty minutes,--twenty minutes, for they had an important
engagement, an _affaire de coor_, by Jove!
"You fellows know something of this matter," said Baker, hurriedly; "but I
cannot begin to tell you how troubled I am. Something is wrong with
_her_. She has not met me once this week, and the house is still as a
grave. I must see her. She is either ill or imprisoned by her people, or
carried away. God only knows why that hound Burnham forbids me the
house. I cannot see him. I've never seen his wife. The door is barred
against me and I cannot force an entrance. For a while she was able to
slip out late in the evening and meet me down the hill-side, but they must
have detected her in some way. I do not even know that she is there, but
to-night I _mean_ to know. If she is within those walls--and alive--she
will answer my signal. But for heaven's sake keep that drunken wretch
from going over there. He's bent on it. The major gave me leave again for
to-night, provided I would see Gleason safely to your camp, and he has
been maundering all the way out about how _he_ knew more'n I did,--he
and Potts, who's half-drunk too,--and how he meant to see me through in
this matter."
"Well, here," said Blake, "there's only one thing to be done. You two slip
away at once; get your horses, and ford the Sandy well below camp. I'll
try and keep him occupied."
In three minutes we were off, leading our steeds until a hundred yards or
so away from the fires, then mounting and moving at rapid walk.
Following Baker's lead, I rode along, wondering what manner of
adventure this was apt to be. I expected him to make an early crossing of
the stream, but he did not. "The only fords I know," said he, "are down
below Starlight," and so it happened that we made a wide _detour_; but
during that dark ride he told me frankly how matters stood. Zoe Burnham
had promised to be his wife, and had fully returned his love, but she was
deeply attached to her poor mother, whose health was utterly broken,
and who seemed to stand in dread of her father. The girl could not bear to
leave her mother, though he had implored her to do so and be married at

once. "She told me the last time I saw her that old Burnham had sworn to
kill me if he caught me around the place, so I have to come armed, you
see;" and he exhibited his heavy revolver. "There's something shady
about the old man, but I don't know what it is."
At last we crossed the stream, and soon reached a point where we
dismounted and fastened our horses among the willows; then slowly and
cautiously began the ascent to the ranch. The slope here was long and
gradual, and before we had gone fifty yards Baker laid his hand on my
arm.
"Wait. Hush!" he said.
Listening, we could distinctly hear the crunching of horses' hoofs, but in
the darkness (for the old moon was not yet showing over the range to the
east) we could distinguish nothing. One thing was certain: those hoofs
were going towards the ranch.
"Heavens!" said Baker. "Do you suppose that Gleason has got the start of
us after all? There's no telling what mischief he may do. He swore he
would stand inside those walls to-night, for there was no Chinaman on
earth whom he could not bribe."
We pushed ahead at the run now, but within a minute I plunged into
some unseen hollow; my Mexican spurs tangled, and down I went heavily
upon the ground. The shock was severe, and for an instant I lay there
half-stunned. Baker was by my side in the twinkling of an eye full of
anxiety and sympathy. I was not injured in the slightest, but the breath
was knocked out of me, and it was some minutes before I could forge
ahead again. We reached the foot of the steep slope; we clambered
painfully--at least I did--to the crest, and there stood the black outline of
Starlight Ranch, with only a glimmer of light shining through the windows
here and there where the shades did not completely cover the space. In
front were three horses held by a cavalry trooper.
"Whose horses are these?" panted Baker.

"Lieutenant Gleason's, sir. Him and Corporal Potts has gone round behind
the ranch with a Chinaman they found takin' in water."
And then, just at that instant, so piercing, so agonized, so fearful that
even the three horses started back snorting and terrified, there rang out
on the still night air the most awful shriek I ever heard, the wail of a
woman in horror and dismay. Then dull, heavy blows; oaths, curses,
stifled exclamations; a fall that shook the windows; Gleason's voice
commanding, entreating; a shrill Chinese jabber; a rush through the hall;
more blows; gasps; curses; more unavailing orders in Gleason's wellknown voice; then a sudden pistol shot, a scream of "Oh, my God!" then
moans, and then silence. The casement on the second floor was thrown
open, and a fair young face and form were outlined upon the bright light
within; a girlish voice called, imploringly,-"Harry! Harry! Oh, help, if you are there! They are killing father!"
But at the first sound Harry Baker had sprung from my side and
disappeared in the darkness.
"We are friends," I shouted to her,--"Harry Baker's friends. He has gone
round to the rear entrance." Then I made a dash for the front door,
shaking, kicking, and hammering with all my might. I had no idea how to
find the rear entrance in the darkness. Presently it was opened by the still
chattering, jabbering Chinaman, his face pasty with terror and
excitement, and the sight that met my eyes was one not soon to be
forgotten.
A broad hall opened straight before me, with a stairway leading to the
second floor. A lamp with burnished reflector was burning brightly midway
down its length. Another just like it fully lighted a big room to my left,-the dining-room, evidently,--on the floor of which, surrounded by
overturned chairs, was lying a woman in a deathlike swoon. Indeed, I
thought at first she was dead. In the room to my right, only dimly lighted,
a tall man in shirt-sleeves was slowly crawling to a sofa, unsteadily
assisted by Gleason; and as I stepped inside, Corporal Potts, who was
leaning against the wall at the other end of the room pressing his hand to
his side and with ashen face, sank suddenly to the floor, doubled up in a

pool of his own blood. In the dining-room, in the hall, everywhere that I
could see, were the marks of a fearful struggle. The man on the sofa
gasped faintly, "Water," and I ran into the dining-room and hastened
back with a brimming goblet.
"What does it all mean?" I demanded of Gleason.
Big drops of sweat were pouring down his pallid face. The fearful scene
had entirely sobered him.
"Potts has found the man who robbed him of his wife. That's she on the
floor yonder. Go and help her."
But she was already coming to and beginning to stare wildly about her. A
glass of water helped to revive her. She staggered across the hall, and
then, with a moan of misery and horror at the sight, threw herself upon
her knees, not beside the sofa where Burnham lay gasping, but on the
floor where lay our poor old corporal. In an instant she had his head in
her lap and was crooning over the senseless clay, swaying her body to
and fro as she piteously called to him,-"Frank, Frank! Oh, for the love of Jesus, speak to me! Frank, dear Frank,
my husband, my own! Oh, for God's sake, open your eyes and look at
me! I wasn't as wicked as they made me out, Frank, God knows I wasn't.
I tried to get back to you, but Pierce there swore you were dead,--swore
you were killed at Cieneguilla. Oh, Frank, Frank, open your eyes! _Do_
hear me, husband. O God, don't let him die! Oh, for pity's sake,
gentlemen, can't you do something? Can't you bring him to? He must
hear me! He must know how I've been lied to all these years!"
"Quick! Take this and see if you can bring him round," said Gleason,
tossing me his flask. I knelt and poured the burning spirit into his open
mouth. There were a few gurgles, half-conscious efforts to swallow, and
then--success. He opened his glazing eyes and looked up into the face of
his wife. His lips moved and he called her by name. She raised him higher
in her arms, pillowing his head upon her bosom, and covered his face with
frantic kisses. The sight seemed too much for "Burnham." His face worked
and twisted with rage; he ground out curses and blasphemy between his

clinched teeth; he even strove to rise from the sofa, but Gleason forced
him back. Meantime, the poor woman's wild remorse and lamentations
were poured into the ears of the dying man.
"Tell me you believe me, Frank. Tell me you forgive me. O God! you don't
know what my life has been with him. When I found out that it was all a
lie about your being killed at Cieneguilla, he beat me like a slave. He had
to go and fight in the war. They made him; they conscripted him; and
when he got back he brought me papers to show you were killed in one of
the Virginia battles. I gave up hope then for good and all."
Just then who should come springing down the stairs but Baker, who had
evidently been calming and soothing his lady-love aloft. He stepped
quickly into the parlor.
"Have you sent for a surgeon?" he asked.
The sound of his voice seemed to rouse "Burnham" to renewed life and
raging hate.
"Surgeons be damned!" he gasped. "I'm past all surgery; but thank God
I've given that ruffian what'll send him to hell before I get there! And you-_you_"--and here he made a frantic grab for the revolver that lay upon
the floor, but Gleason kicked it away--"you, young hound, I meant to
have wound you up before I got through. But I can jeer at you--Godforsaken idiot--I can triumph over you;" and he stretched forth a
quivering, menacing arm and hand. "You _would_ have your way--damn
you!--so take it. You've given your love to a bastard,--that's what Zoe is."
Baker stood like one turned suddenly into stone. But from the other end
of the room came prompt, wrathful, and with the ring of truth in her
earnest protest, the mother's loud defence of her child.
"It's a lie,--a fiendish and malignant lie,--and he knows it. Here lies her
father, my own husband, murdered by that scoundrel there. Her
baptismal certificate is in my room. I've kept it all these years where he
never could get it. No, Frank, she's your own, your own baby, whom you
never saw. Go--go and bring her. He _must_ see his baby-girl. Oh, my

darling, don't--don't go until you see her." And again she covered the
ashen face with her kisses. I knelt and put the flask to his lips and he
eagerly swallowed a few drops. Baker had turned and darted up-stairs.
"Burnham's" late effort had proved too much for him. He had fainted
away, and the blood was welling afresh from several wounds.
A moment more and Baker reappeared, leading his betrothed. With her
long, golden hair rippling down her back, her face white as death, and her
eyes wild with dread, she was yet one of the loveliest pictures I ever
dreamed of. Obedient to her mother's signal, she knelt close beside them,
saying no word.
"Zoe, darling, this is your own father; the one I told you of last winter."
Old Potts seemed struggling to rise; an inexpressible tenderness shone
over his rugged, bearded face; his eyes fastened themselves on the lovely
girl before him with a look almost as of wonderment; his lips seemed
striving to whisper her name. His wife raised him still higher, and Baker
reverently knelt and supported the shoulder of the dying man. There was
the silence of the grave in the dimly-lighted room. Slowly, tremulously the
arm in the old blue blouse was raised and extended towards the kneeling
girl. Lowly she bent, clasping her hands and with the tears now welling
from her eyes. One moment more and the withered old hand that for
quarter of a century had grasped the sabre-hilt in the service of our
common country slowly fell until it rested on that beautiful, golden head,-one little second or two, in which the lips seemed to murmur a prayer
and the fast glazing eyes were fixed in infinite tenderness upon his only
child. Then suddenly they sought the face of his sobbing wife,--a quick,
faint smile, a sigh, and the hand dropped to the floor. The old trooper's
life had gone out in benediction.
*****
Of course there was trouble all around before that wretched affair was
explained. Gleason came within an ace of court-martial, but escaped it by
saying that he knew of "Burnham's" threats against the life of Lieutenant
Baker, and that he went to the ranch in search of the latter and to get
him out of danger. They met the Chinaman outside drawing water, and he

ushered them in the back way because it was the nearest. Potts asked to
go with him that he might see if this was his long-lost wife,--so said
Gleason,--and the instant she caught sight of him she shrieked and
fainted, and the two men sprang at each other like tigers. Knives were
drawn in a minute. Then Burnham fled through the hall, snatched a
revolver from its rack, and fired the fatal shot. The surgeon from Fort
Phoenix reached them early the next morning, a messenger having been
despatched from Crocker's ranch before eleven at night, but all his skill
could not save "Burnham," now known to be Pierce, the ex-sutler clerk of
the early Fifties. He had prospered and made money ever since the close
of the war, and Zoe had been thoroughly well educated in the East before
the poor child was summoned to share her mother's exile. His mania
seemed to be to avoid all possibility of contact with the troops, but the
Crockers had given such glowing accounts of the land near Fort Phoenix,
and they were so positively assured that there need be no intercourse
whatever with that post, that he determined to risk it. But, go where he
would, his sin had found him out.
The long hot summer followed, but it often happened that before many
weeks there were interchanges of visits between the fort and the ranch.
The ladies insisted that the widow should come thither for change and
cheer, and Zoe's appearance at Phoenix was the sensation of the year.
Baker was in the seventh heaven. "Burnham," it was found, had a certain
sense of justice, for his will had been made long before, and everything
he possessed was left unreservedly to the woman whom he had betrayed
and, in his tigerish way, doubtless loved, for he had married her in '65,
the instant he succeeded in convincing her that Potts was really dead.
So far from combating the will, both the Crockers were cordial in their
support. Indeed, it was the elder brother who told the widow of its
existence. They had known her and her story many a year, and were
ready to devote themselves to her service now. The junior moved up to
the "Burnham" place to take general charge and look after matters, for
the property was every day increasing in value. And so matters went until
the fall, and then, one lovely evening, in the little wooden chapel at the
old fort, there was a gathering such as its walls had never known before;
and the loveliest bride that Arizona ever saw, blushing, smiling, and

radiantly happy, received the congratulations of the entire garrison and of
delegations from almost every post in the department.
A few years ago, to the sorrow of everybody in the regiment, Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Baker bade it good-by forever. The fond old mother who had so
long watched over the growing property for "her children," as she called
them, had no longer the strength the duties required. Crocker had taken
unto himself a helpmate and was needed at his own place, and our gallant
and genial comrade with his sweet wife left us only when it became
evident to all at Phoenix that a new master was needed at Starlight
Ranch.

