Who Was My Quiet Friend?
by Bret Harte
"Stranger!"
The voice was not loud, but clear and penetrating. I looked vainly up and
down the narrow, darkening trail. No one in the fringe of alder ahead; no
one on the gullied slope behind.
"O! stranger!"
This time a little impatiently. The California classical vocative, "O," always
meant business.
I looked up, and perceived for the first time on the ledge, thirty feet
above me, another trail parallel with my own, and looking down upon me
through the buckeye bushes a small man on a black horse.
Five things to be here noted by the circumspect mountaineer. FIRST, the
locality,--lonely and inaccessible, and away from the regular faring of
teamsters and miners. SECONDLY, the stranger's superior knowledge of
the road, from the fact that the other trail was unknown to the ordinary
traveler. THIRDLY, that he was well armed and equipped. FOURTHLY, that
he was better mounted. FIFTHLY, that any distrust or timidity arising from
the contemplation of these facts had better be kept to one's self.
All this passed rapidly through my mind as I returned his salutation.
"Got any tobacco?" he asked.
I had, and signified the fact, holding up the pouch inquiringly.
"All right, I'll come down. Ride on, and I'll jine ye on the slide."
"The slide!" Here was a new geographical discovery as odd as the second
trail. I had ridden over the trail a dozen times, and seen no
communication between the ledge and trail. Nevertheless, I went on a
hundred yards or so, when there was a sharp crackling in the underbrush,
a shower of stones on the trail, and my friend plunged through the

bushes to my side, down a grade that I should scarcely have dared to
lead my horse. There was no doubt he was an accomplished rider,-another fact to be noted.
As he ranged beside me, I found I was not mistaken as to his size; he
was quite under the medium height, and but for a pair of cold, gray eyes,
was rather commonplace in feature.
"You've got a good horse there," I suggested.
He was filling his pipe from my pouch, but looked up a little surprised,
and said, "Of course." He then puffed away with the nervous eagerness of
a man long deprived of that sedative. Finally, between the puffs, he asked
me whence I came.
I replied, "From Lagrange."
He looked at me a few moments curiously, but on my adding that I had
only halted there for a few hours, he said: "I thought I knew every man
between Lagrange and Indian Spring, but somehow I sorter disremember
your face and your name."
Not particularly caring that he should remember either, I replied half
laughingly, that, as I lived the other side of Indian Spring, it was quite
natural. He took the rebuff, if such it was, so quietly that as an act of
mere perfunctory politeness I asked him where he came from.
"Lagrange."
"And you are going to--"
"Well! that depends pretty much on how things pan out, and whether I
can make the riffle." He let his hand rest quite unconsciously on the
leathern holster of his dragoon revolver, yet with a strong suggestion to
me of his ability "to make the riffle" if he wanted to, and added: "But just
now I was reck'nin' on taking a little pasear with you."
There was nothing offensive in his speech save its familiarity, and the
reflection, perhaps, that whether I objected or not, he was quite able to
do as he said. I only replied that if our pasear was prolonged beyond
Heavytree Hill, I should have to borrow his beast. To my surprise he

replied quietly, "That's so," adding that the horse was at my disposal
when he wasn't using it, and HALF of it when he was. "Dick has carried
double many a time before this," he continued, "and kin do it again; when
your mustang gives out I'll give you a lift and room to spare."
I could not help smiling at the idea of appearing before the boys at Red
Gulch en croupe with the stranger; but neither could I help being oddly
affected by the suggestion that his horse had done double duty before.
"On what occasion, and why?" was a question I kept to myself. We were
ascending the long, rocky flank of the divide; the narrowness of the trail
obliged us to proceed slowly, and in file, so that there was little chance for
conversation, had he been disposed to satisfy my curiosity.
We toiled on in silence, the buckeye giving way to chimisal, the westering
sun, reflected again from the blank walls beside us, blinding our eyes with
its glare. The pines in the canyon below were olive gulfs of heat, over
which a hawk here and there drifted lazily, or, rising to our level, cast a
weird and gigantic shadow of slowly moving wings on the mountain side.
The superiority of the stranger's horse led him often far in advance, and
made me hope that he might forget me entirely, or push on, growing
weary of waiting. But regularly he would halt by a bowlder, or reappear
from some chimisal, where he had patiently halted. I was beginning to
hate him mildly, when at one of those reappearances he drew up to my
side, and asked me how I liked Dickens!
Had he asked my opinion of Huxley or Darwin, I could not have been
more astonished. Thinking it were possible that he referred to some local
celebrity of Lagrange, I said, hesitatingly:-"You mean--"
"Charles Dickens. Of course you've read him? Which of his books do you
like best?"
I replied with considerable embarrassment that I liked them all,--as I
certainly did.
He grasped my hand for a moment with a fervor quite unlike his usual
phlegm, and said, "That's me, old man. Dickens ain't no slouch. You can
count on him pretty much all the time."

With this rough preface, he launched into a criticism of the novelist, which
for intelligent sympathy and hearty appreciation I had rarely heard
equaled. Not only did he dwell upon the exuberance of his humor, but
upon the power of his pathos and the all-pervading element of his poetry.
I looked at the man in astonishment. I had considered myself a rather
diligent student of the great master of fiction, but the stranger's felicity of
quotation and illustration staggered me. It is true, that his thought was
not always clothed in the best language, and often appeared in the
slouching, slangy undress of the place and period, yet it never was rustic
nor homespun, and sometimes struck me with its precision and fitness.
Considerably softened toward him, I tried him with other literature. But
vainly. Beyond a few of the lyrical and emotional poets, he knew nothing.
Under the influence and enthusiasm of his own speech, he himself had
softened considerably; offered to change horses with me, readjusted my
saddle with professional skill, transferred my pack to his own horse,
insisted upon my sharing the contents of his whisky flask, and, noticing
that I was unarmed, pressed upon me a silver-mounted Derringer, which
he assured me he could "warrant." These various offices of good will and
the diversion of his talk beguiled me from noticing the fact that the trail
was beginning to become obscure and unrecognizable. We were evidently
pursuing a route unknown before to me. I pointed out the fact to my
companion, a little impatiently. He instantly resumed his old manner and
dialect.
"Well, I reckon one trail's as good as another, and what hev ye got to say
about it?"
I pointed out, with some dignity, that I preferred the old trail.
"Mebbe you did. But you're jiss now takin' a pasear with ME. This yer trail
will bring you right into Indian Spring, and ONNOTICED, and no questions
asked. Don't you mind now, I'll see you through."
It was necessary here to make some stand against my strange
companion. I said firmly, yet as politely as I could, that I had proposed
stopping over night with a friend.
"Whar?"
I hesitated. The friend was an eccentric Eastern man, well known in the
locality for his fastidiousness and his habits as a recluse. A misanthrope,

of ample family and ample means, he had chosen a secluded but
picturesque valley in the Sierras where he could rail against the world
without opposition. "Lone Valley," or "Boston Ranch," as it was familiarly
called, was the one spot that the average miner both respected and
feared. Mr. Sylvester, its proprietor, had never affiliated with "the boys,"
nor had he ever lost their respect by any active opposition to their ideas.
If seclusion had been his object, he certainly was gratified. Nevertheless,
in the darkening shadows of the night, and on a lonely and unknown trail,
I hesitated a little at repeating his name to a stranger of whom I knew so
little. But my mysterious companion took the matter out of my hands.
"Look yar," he said, suddenly, "thar ain't but one place twixt yer and
Indian Spring whar ye can stop, and that is Sylvester's."
I assented, a little sullenly.
"Well," said the stranger, quietly, and with a slight suggestion of
conferring a favor on me, "ef yer pointed for Sylvester's--why--I DON'T
MIND STOPPING THAR WITH YE. It's a little off the road--I'll lose some
time--but taking it by and large, I don't much mind."
I stated, as rapidly and as strongly as I could, that my acquaintance with
Mr. Sylvester did not justify the introduction of a stranger to his
hospitality; that he was unlike most of the people here,--in short, that he
was a queer man, etc., etc.
To my surprise my companion answered quietly: "Oh, that's all right. I've
heerd of him. Ef you don't feel like checking me through, or if you'd
rather put 'C. O. D.' on my back, why it's all the same to me. I'll play it
alone. Only you just count me in. Say 'Sylvester' all the time. That's me!"
What could I oppose to this man's quiet assurance? I felt myself growing
red with anger and nervous with embarrassment. What would the correct
Sylvester say to me? What would the girls,--I was a young man then, and
had won an entree to their domestic circle by my reserve,--known by a
less complimentary adjective among "the boys,"--what would they say to
my new acquaintance? Yet I certainly could not object to his assuming all
risks on his own personal recognizances, nor could I resist a certain
feeling of shame at my embarrassment.

We were beginning to descend. In the distance below us already twinkled
the lights in the solitary rancho of Lone Valley. I turned to my companion.
"But you have forgotten that I don't even know your name. What am I to
call you?"
"That's so," he said, musingly. "Now, let's see. 'Kearney' would be a good
name. It's short and easy like. Thar's a street in 'Frisco the same title;
Kearney it is."
"But--" I began impatiently.
"Now you leave all that to me," he interrupted, with a superb selfconfidence that I could not but admire. "The name ain't no account. It's
the man that's responsible. Ef I was to lay for a man that I reckoned was
named Jones, and after I fetched him I found out on the inquest that his
real name was Smith, that wouldn't make no matter, as long as I got the
man."
The illustration, forcible as it was, did not strike me as offering a
prepossessing introduction, but we were already at the rancho. The
barking of dogs brought Sylvester to the door of the pretty little cottage
which his taste had adorned.
I briefly introduced Mr. Kearney. "Kearney will do--Kearney's good
enough for me," commented the soi-disant Kearney half-aloud, to my
own horror and Sylvester's evident mystification, and then he blandly
excused himself for a moment that he might personally supervise the care
of his own beast. When he was out of ear-shot I drew the puzzled
Sylvester aside.
"I have picked up--I mean I have been picked up on the road by a gentle
maniac, whose name is not Kearney. He is well armed and quotes
Dickens. With care, acquiescence in his views on all subjects, and general
submission to his commands, he may be placated. Doubtless the
spectacle of your helpless family, the contemplation of your daughter's
beauty and innocence, may touch his fine sense of humor and pathos.
Meanwhile, Heaven help you, and forgive me."
I ran upstairs to the little den that my hospitable host had kept always
reserved for me in my wanderings. I lingered some time over my
ablutions, hearing the languid, gentlemanly drawl of Sylvester below,

mingled with the equally cool, easy slang of my mysterious acquaintance.
When I came down to the sitting-room I was surprised, however, to find
the self-styled Kearney quietly seated on the sofa, the gentle May
Sylvester, the "Lily of Lone Valley," sitting with maidenly awe and
unaffected interest on one side of him, while on the other that arrant flirt,
her cousin Kate, was practicing the pitiless archery of her eyes, with an
excitement that seemed almost real.
"Who is your deliciously cool friend?" she managed to whisper to me at
supper, as I sat utterly dazed and bewildered between the enrapt May
Sylvester, who seemed to hang upon his words, and this giddy girl of the
period, who was emptying the battery of her charms in active rivalry upon
him. "Of course we know his name isn't Kearney. But how romantic! And
isn't he perfectly lovely? And who is he?"
I replied with severe irony that I was not aware what foreign potentate
was then traveling incognito in the Sierras of California, but that when his
royal highness was pleased to inform me, I should be glad to introduce
him properly. "Until then," I added, "I fear the acquaintance must be
Morganatic."
"You're only jealous of him," she said pertly. "Look at May--she is
completely fascinated. And her father, too." And actually, the languid,
world-sick, cynical Sylvester was regarding him with a boyish interest and
enthusiasm almost incompatible with his nature. Yet I submit honestly to
the clear-headed reason of my own sex, that I could see nothing more in
the man than I have already delivered to the reader.
In the middle of an exciting story of adventure, of which he, to the
already prejudiced mind of his fair auditors, was evidently the hero, he
stopped suddenly.
"It's only some pack train passing the bridge on the lower trail," explained
Sylvester; "go on."
"It may be my horse is a trifle oneasy in the stable," said the alleged
Kearney; "he ain't used to boards and covering." Heaven only knows what
wild and delicious revelation lay in the statement of this fact, but the girls
looked at each other with cheeks pink with excitement as Kearney arose,
and, with quiet absence of ceremony, quitted the table.

"Ain't he just lovely?" said Kate, gasping for breath, "and so witty."
"Witty!" said the gentle May, with just the slightest trace of defiance in
her sweet voice; "witty, my dear? why, don't you see that his heart is just
breaking with pathos? Witty, indeed; why, when he was speaking of that
poor Mexican woman that was hung, I saw the tears gather in his eyes.
Witty, indeed!"
"Tears," laughed the cynical Sylvester, "tears, idle tears. Why, you silly
children, the man is a man of the world, a philosopher, quiet, observant,
unassuming."
"Unassuming!" Was Sylvester intoxicated, or had the mysterious stranger
mixed the "insane verb" with the family pottage? He returned before I
could answer this self-asked inquiry, and resumed coolly his broken
narrative. Finding myself forgotten in the man I had so long hesitated to
introduce to my friends, I retired to rest early, only to hear, through the
thin partitions, two hours later, enthusiastic praises of the new guest from
the voluble lips of the girls, as they chatted in the next room before
retiring.
At midnight I was startled by the sound of horses' hoofs and the jingling
of spurs below. A conversation between my host and some mysterious
personage in the darkness was carried on in such a low tone that I could
not learn its import. As the cavalcade rode away I raised the window.
"What's the matter?"
"Nothing," said Sylvester, coolly, "only another one of those playful
homicidal freaks peculiar to the country. A man was shot by Cherokee
Jack over at Lagrange this morning, and that was the sheriff of Calaveras
and his posse hunting him. I told him I'd seen nobody but you and your
friend. By the way, I hope the cursed noise hasn't disturbed him. The
poor fellow looked as if he wanted rest."
I thought so, too. Nevertheless, I went softly to his room. It was empty.
My impression was that he had distanced the sheriff of Calaveras about
two hours.

