The Burglary Club
By Arthur Quiller-Couch
"Yes," said the Judge, "I ought by this time to know something of Cornish
juries. They acquit oftener than other juries, to be sure; and the general
notion is that they incline more towards mercy. Privately, I believe that
mercy has very little to do with it."
"Stupidity," said the High Sheriff sententiously, and sipped his wine. His
own obtuseness on the Bench was notorious, and had kept adding for
thirty years to the Duchy's stock of harmless merriment.
"Nothing of the sort," snapped his lordship. "You can convict a man, I
presume, as stupidly as you can acquit him. No: with other juries a crime
is a crime, and a misdemeanour is a misdemeanour. You tell them so and
they accept it. But with Cornishmen you have first to explain that the
alleged offence is illegal; next, you must satisfy them that it ought to be
illegal; and then, if you choose, you can proceed to prove that the
prisoner committed it. They will finally discharge him on the ground that
he never had the advantage of such a clear exposition of the law as they
have just enjoyed."
"Well, but isn't that stupidity?" persisted the High Sheriff.
The Judge turned impatiently and addressed a grey-headed man on his
left. "Did I ever tell you, Mr.--, how I once enjoyed the hospitality of a
Cornish village, through the simple accident of being mistaken for a
burglar?"
The grey-headed man--an eminent Q.C. and leader of the Western
Circuit-- dropped an olive into his glass of sherry. He had been dozing.
Two or three guests and members of the Junior Bar drew their chairs
closer.
"It was in 1845," the Judge began, "just after I had taken my degree, and
I had been walking through Cornwall with a knapsack--no small
adventure, I can tell you, in those days. The inhabitants declined to
believe that anyone could walk and carry a pack for the fun of the thing,
and I left a trail of suspicion behind me. The folks were invariably

hospitable, though convinced that I was pursuing no good. You
remember, Mr.--, that when Telemachus visited Gerenia he was
generously entertained, and afterwards politely asked if he happened to
be a pirate. My case was pretty similar, only my Cornish hosts did not
ask, but took it for granted.
"In the first week of August--to be precise, on the 4th--I reached Polreen
Cove, and found lodging at the small inn. The spot and the people so
pleased me that I engaged my rooms for a week. At the week's end I had
decided to stay for a month. I stayed for almost two months.
"Well, as luck would have it, I had not been in Polreen three nights before
there happened the first burglary within the memory of its oldest
inhabitant--if burglary it was. I incline to think that Mrs. Giddy, the
general dealer, had left her shop-door unbolted, and that the culprit, after
removing the bell--the door had two flaps, and the bell, hung on a halfcoil of metal, was fitted to a socket inside the lower flap--had quietly
walked in and made his choice. This choice was a peculiar one-- six bars
of yellow soap, a cullender, some tallow candles, a pair of alpaca boots, a
pair of braces, several boxes of matches, an uncertain amount of cheese,
a dozen pocket-handkerchiefs, a coloured almanack, three of Mrs. Giddy's
brass weights, and the bell. He was detected two months later at Bristol,
in the act of using one of the handkerchiefs, which illustrated the descent
of Moses from Mount Sinai; and four other handkerchiefs were found in
his possession, together with Mrs. Giddy's brass weights. He had disposed
of the rest of the booty, and proved to be a stowaway who had been
turned out of a Cardiff schooner on Penzance quay, penniless and
starving. Nothing further was proved against him, and it still puzzles me
how he made his way through the length of Cornwall, Devon, and
Somerset, on the not very nutritious spoils of Mrs. Giddy's shop.
"For the moment he got clear away. Not a soul in Polreen had set eyes on
him, and as he entered the village by night so he departed.
"I know now that the excitement in the Cove was intense; that for weeks
afterwards the women carried their silver teaspoons and chinaware to bed
with them; and I should explain that the housewives of Polreen are
inordinately proud of their teaspoons and chinaware--heirlooms which
mark the only degrees of social importance recognised among the
inhabitants of that happy Cove. A family there counts its teaspoons as our
old nobility counted its quarterings; a girl is judged to have made a good,

bad, or indifferent match by the number of teaspoons she 'marries into';
and the extreme act of disinheritance is symbolised, not by the
testamentary shilling, nor by erasing a name from the Family Bible, but
by alienating the family plate-basket. In short, teaspoons are to the
Covers what the salt-cellar was to the ancient Latin races.
"But at the time, though I could not help observing symptoms of
suppressed excitement, the Cove behaved with an outward calm which
struck me as highly creditable. To be sure, the men seemed to spend an
extravagant amount of their time in the tap-room of the inn, which
happened to be immediately beneath my sitting-room. Hour after hour
the sound of their muffled conversation ascended to me through the
planching, as I sat and studied--Dumas, I think. Low, monotonous,
untiring, it lasted from breakfast-time until nine o'clock at night, when it
ceased abruptly, the company dispersed, and each man went home to
reassure and protect his wife. I suppose some liquor was required to start
this conversation and keep it going, just as seamen use a bucketful of
water to start a ship's pump; but I must admit that during my whole stay
at Polreen I never saw an inhabitant who could be described as the worse
for drink.
"I did not know that this assemblage in the tap-room was unusual and
clean contrary to the men's habits, and therefore may be excused for not
guessing its significance. Nor was I familiar enough with Polreen to note
an even more frequent change in the atmosphere and routine of its daily
life. When the weather is fine, down there, the men put out to sea and
the women go about their work with smiles. When it blows, the women go
about their work, but resignedly and in a temper, which the men avoid by
ranging up shoulder to shoulder along the wall by the lifeboat house, and
gazing with approval at the weather; with approval, because it relieves
them of the fatigue of argument. But should the day break doubtfully, and
the men incline to give themselves the benefit of the doubt, then, indeed,
you will learn who are masters of the Cove. For in extreme cases the
women will even invade the 'randivoo,' and shrill is the noise of battle
until the weather declares unmistakably for one side or the other. Does it
refuse to declare itself? Then I can promise you that half an hour will see
the men routed and straggling down the beach to their boats, arching
their backs and ducking their heads, may be, under the parting volley.
"But, as I say, I did not know Polreen and its ways. It awoke no wonder in
me to see the bulk of its male population ranged like statues, day after

day, and from dawn till eve, against the wall by the lifeboat house, talking
little (or ceasing, at any rate, to talk when I approached), smoking much,
conning a serene sky, and the dimples spread on the sea by a gentle nor'westerly breeze. At intervals one or two would leisurely fall out of the line
and saunter towards the inn, leaving their places to others as leisurely
sauntering from the inn. It did, indeed, occur to me to wonder how they
earned their living, for during the first fortnight, beyond the occasional
hauling of a crab-pot, I saw no evidence at all of labour. It was on the tip
of my tongue, once or twice, to question them; but, though polite, they
clearly had no wish to be communicative.
"I found great difficulty in hiring a boat and the services of its owner. I
wished to be rowed along the coast; to try for pollack; to inspect some of
Polreen's famous caves. The men were polite again; but one boat leaked
badly, another had been pulled up for the carpenter to insert a new
strake, a third was too heavy, the owner of a fourth could not leave his
business--it wouldn't pay him! At length I patched up a bargain with an
old fisherman named Udy--or rather Old Tom Udy, to distinguish him from
his son, who was Young Tom. He owned the most ramshackle old boat in
the Cove: if the others were out of repair, his was manifestly beyond it. I
took my life in my hands and struck the bargain.
"'When do 'ee want her?'
"'Now, at once,' said I; 'or as soon as you have had your dinner.'
"He went back to the company by the lifeboat house. He reminded me of
some ancient king consulting a company of stone gods. They looked at
him, and he looked at them. I suppose a word or two was said; half a
dozen of them spat reflectively; nobody moved. Old Tom Udy came down
the beach again; we embarked and pushed off, and the row of
expressionless faces watched us from the shore.
"In silence we visited the famous caverns. As we emerged from the last of
these I essayed some casual talk. To tell the truth, I was beginning to feel
the want of it, and of course I began on the first topic of local interest-the burglary.
"'The odd thing to me,' said I, 'is that you seem to have no particular
suspicions.'

"'I'd rather you didn' talk of it,' said Old Tom Udy. 'I got my living to get,
and 'tis a day's journey to Bodmin. Tho' you musn' think,' he added, 'that
we bear any gridge.'
"'It seems to me that you men in the Cove treat the whole affair very
lightly.'
"'Iss, tha's of it,' he assented. 'Mind you, tisn' _right_, Seemin' to me 'tis
a terrible thought. Here you be, for the sake of argument, a Christian
man, and in beauty next door to the angels, and the only use you make
of it is to steal groceries. You don't think I'm putting it too strong?'
"' Not a bit.'
"'Well, I'm glad o' that, because, since you ask me, as a professing
Christian, I cudn' say any less. But you musn' think we bear any gridge.'
"'I'm sure I wonder you don't. And the police still have no clue?'
"'The police? You mean Sammy Crego, the constable? Why, I've knawed
en from a boy--pretty thing if any person in Polreen listened to he! No: us
han't failed so low yet as to mind anything the constable says.'
"'Then the whole affair is as much a mystery as ever?'
"'Now, look 'ee here; I don't want to tell nothin' more about it. A still
tongue makes a wise head; an' there's a pollack on the end of your line.'
"The wind stuck in the north-west, and day after day the regal summer
weather continued. I grew tired of hauling in pollack, and determined to
have a try for the more exciting conger. The fun of this, as you know,
does not begin till night-fall, and it was seven o'clock in the evening, or
thereabouts, when we pushed off from the beach. By eight we had
reached the best grounds and begun operations. An hour passed, or a
little more, and then Old Tom Udy asked when I thought of returning.
"'Why, bless the man,' said I, 'we've not had a bite yet!'
"He glanced at me furtively while he lit a pipe. 'I reckoned, maybe, you
might have business ashore, so to speak.'

"'What earthly business should I have in Polreen at this hour?'
"'Aw, well . . . you know best . . . no affair o' mine. 'Tis a dark night, too.'
"'All the better for conger, eh?'
"'So 'tis.' He seemed about to say more, but at that moment I felt a long
pull on the line, and for an hour or two the conger kept us busy.
"It must have been a week later, at least (for the moon was drawing to
the full), that I pulled up the blind of my sitting-room a little before midnight, and, ravished by the beauty of the scene (for, I tell you, Polreen
can be beautiful by moonlight), determined to stroll down to the beach
and smoke my last pipe there before going to bed. The door of the inn
was locked, no doubt; but, the house standing on the steep slope of the
main street, I could step easily on to the edge of the water-barrel beneath
my window and lower myself to the ground.
"I did so. Just as I touched solid earth I heard footsteps. They paused
suddenly, and, glancing up the moonlit road, I descried the gigantic figure
of Wesley Truscott, the coxswain of the lifeboat. He must have seen me,
for the light on the whitewashed front of the inn was almost as brilliant as
day. But, whatever his business, he had no wish to meet me, for he
dodged aside into the shadow of a porch, and after a few seconds I heard
him tip-toeing up the hill again.
"I began to have my doubts about Polreen's primitive virtues. Certainly
the village, as it lay bathed in moonlight, its whitewashed terraces and
glimmering roofs embowered in dark clusters of fuchsia and tamarisk,
seemed to harbour nothing but peace and sleeping innocence. An ebbing
tide lapped the pebbles on the beach, each pebble distinct and glistening
as the water left it. Far in the quiet offing the lights of a fishing-fleet
twinkled like a line of jewels through the haze.
"Half-way down the beach I turned for a backward look at the village.
"Now the wall by the lifeboat house looks on the Cove. Its front is turned
from the village and the village street, and can only be seen from the
beach. You may imagine my surprise, then, as I turned and found myself
face to face with a dozen tall men, standing there upright and silent.

"'Good Heavens!' I cried, 'what is the matter? What brings you all here at
this time of night?'
"If I was surprised, they were obviously embarrassed. They drew together
a little, as if to avoid observation. But the moon shone full on the wall,
affording them not a scrap of shadow.
"For a moment no one answered. Then I heard mutterings, and, as I
stepped up, one of the elder men, Archelaus Warne by name, was pushed
forward.
"'We wasn' expectin' of you down here,' he stammered, after clearing his
throat.
"'No reason why you should,' said I.
"'We done our best to keep out o' your way--never thinkin' you'd be after
the boats,'--he nodded towards the boats drawn up on the beach at our
feet.
"'I'm afraid I don't understand you in the least.'
"'Well, you see, 'tis a kind o' club.'
"'Indeed?' said I, not in the least enlightened.
"'Iss;' he turned to his companions. 'I s'pose I'd better tell en?' They
nodded gravely, and he resumed. 'You see, 'tis this way: ever since that
burglary there's no resting for the women. My poor back is blue all over
with the cloam my missus takes to bed. And ha'f a dozen times a night
'tis, '_Arch'laus, I'm sartin I hear some person movin'-- Arch'laus, fit an'
take a light and have a look downstairs, that's a dear!_' An' these
fellows'll tell 'ee 'tis every bit so bad with they. 'Tis right enough in the
daytime, so long as the women got us 'ithin hail, but by night there's no
peace nor rest.'
"One or two husbands corroborated.
"'Well, now--I think 'twas the third night after this affair happened-- I
crep' downstairs for the fifth time or so just to ease the old woman's
mind, and opens the door, when what do I see but Billy Polkinghorne

here, sittin' on his own doorstep like a lost dog. 'Aw,' says I, 'so thee'rt
feelin' of it, too!' 'Feelin' of it!' says he, 'durned if this isn' the awnly place
I can get a wink o' sleep!' 'Come'st way long to Wall-end and tetch pipe,'
says I. Tha's how it began. An' now, ever since Billy thought 'pon the plan
of settin' someone, turn an' turn, to watch your window, there's nothin' to
hurry us. Why, only just as you came along, Billy was saying, 'Burglary!'
he says, 'why, I han't been so happy in mind since the _Indian Queen_
came ashore!''
"'Watch my window? Why the--' And then, as light broke on me, 'Look
here,' I said, 'you don't mean to tell me you've been suspecting _me_ of
the burglary all this time!'
"'You musn' think,' said Archelaus Warne, 'that we bear any gridge.'"
"Well," the Judge concluded, "as I told you, the thief was apprehended a
week or two later, and my innocence established. But, oddly enough,
some thirty years after I had to try a case at the Assizes here, in which
Archelaus Warne (very old and infirm) appeared as a witness, I
recognised him at once, and, when I sent for him afterwards and inquired
after my friends at Polreen, his first words were, 'There now--I wasn' so
far wrong, after all! I knawed you must be mixed up with these things,
wan way or 'nother.'"

